I beg to move, to leave out from" That" to the end of the Question and to add instead thereof: I should like, at the outset, to pay tribute to the hon. Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles (Mr. David Steel) for the moderate and well-reasoned way in which he moved the Second Reading of his Bill. He told the House that he thought that one disqualification was his being young. That is a disability which he will soon outgrow. My disqualification is the contrary one of being old and that, unhappily, only gets worse year by year.

We are dealing with a matter of deep importance and of great controversial potentialities on which there are deep anxieties and strong feelings on each side. I hope to deal with it in a way which will not inflame those feelings. However much we differ, there are at least three respects in which, I would have thought, all hon. Members could agree: that we are dealing with people suffering in different ways and in an acutely tragic predicament, that too little has been done for such people in the past, that more should be done for them in future, and I am sure that it is common to both sides of the argument that we would wish to restrict and, if possible  it is unlikely to be possible to abolish the activities of the back-street abortionists.

 Having said those things, I want to make some general observations on the approach of some of us to this matter before dealing with the three grounds on which we ask the House to reject the Bill. The hon. Member has spoken of the position of the Catholics. As some hon. Members know, I am a Roman Catholic, but the hon. Lady the Member for Birmingham, Edgbaston (Mrs. Knight), who, if she catches your eye, Mr. Speaker, will speak in the debate and who has seconded my Amendment is not a Roman Catholic. Nor are a number of hon. Members who have put their names to the Amendment, I shall not seek to introduce any theological arguments, for one very good reason: I am not qualified to do so. But, for another reason, those of us who are Catholics are taught that, although some of our beliefs transcend reason, they can all be explained in reasonable terms, in terms of logic, and those arc, the terms in which I shall try to speak.

I entirely agree with the hon. Gentleman that the last thing that we as Catholics would or should seek to do is to impose our beliefs, or the consequences of our beliefs, on those who do not share them. We do not in fact do so. I think that the hon. Gentleman is beating the pistol in what he says about contraception and is quite wrong about the likelihood of a change in the Church's attitude to abortion. We do not regard contraception and abortion as things which can be discussed on the same plane.

In matters of contraception, people must decide how they manage their own lives in accordance with their own consciences. We would not seek to interfere with that in any way. But we say that abortion is an entirely different matter and that in taking the stand which we take we are not only upholding the common tradition of Christianity, but are protecting principles which stand at the very root of an ordered society. We may be right, we may be wrong, but that is our position. That is the sense in which we argue.

There is a third approach which I would wish to put before the House. This matter is sometimes argued as though it were an issue between enlighten- ment and obscurantism. Those who, like myself, regularly read the are very familiar with the argument. Some people suggest that abortion is part of a common approach to a progressive society. They bracket it with capital punishment, the legalisation of homosexual practices between consenting male adults in private and even almost the nationalisation of iron and steel.

I voted for the abolition of capital punishment in the , when the hon. Gentleman would probably modestly tell us that he was at his preparatory school. I was a signatory of the Wolfenden Report on Homosexual Offences and Prostitution. I was a member of the drafting sub-committee with Sir John Wolfenden and Canon Demant. When that Committee met and Sir John was unable to be present its members did me the honour of moving me into the chair. Finally, my record on the nationalisation of iron and steel is unsullied. I was one of those who, in the 1945 Parliament 

I accept that, Mr. Speaker. But may I say, apostrophising a famous phrase, on this record who is enlightened ; and I am not enlightened. I stand firmly against the Bill.

May I deal with the three grounds on which we ask in our Amendment the House to reject the Bill. We say, in the first place, that it threatens the independence of the medical profession. I do not seek to argue more than this, although perhaps more can be argued, that the medical profession is clearly deeply divided about this matter. The B.M.A., for instance, supports change, but not altogether the change which the hon. Gentleman proposes. The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists says," Let us get more information before we do anything". I did not hear that interruption. Perhaps I may be excused for developing my argument in my own way.

I said that I would try to deal very shortly with most of the aspects of the Bill because other Members who have more knowledge of particular points would develop them. I have read the report to which my hon. Friend the Member for Wolverhampton, North-East (Mrs. Renée Short) referred. I entirely accept what she says. But all I sought to show was that it did not wish any change to be made until more information had been obtained.

I do not know why it has happened in this way, but the gynaecologists in the Birmingham area who have been consulted seem to be uniformly or almost uniformly by an overwhelming majority  against any change in the law at present. Therefore, I think it is established that the medical profession is deeply divided.

No.

In view of the considerable differences of emphasis between, on the one side, the Royal College's approach and that of the Birmingham gynaecologists and, on the other, the B.M.A. one would be inclined but I would not press it for a moment to say that where there is more specialised knowledge the more the need for caution is accepted.

But this does not go to the question of independence. Why do we say that this Measure threatens the independence of the medical profession? My postbag contains a good deal of evidence that doctors do indeed feel this. But the more the hon. Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles emphasises the fact from which I do not differ that there is a strong demand for abortion from many quarters, the more difficult is the position of a doctor who has any criteria introduced by the law except the ordinary test of what is in the interests of the health of the patient who has come to see him. I think that this must be so with the practitioner in ordinary practice.

But when we come to the doctor and the nurse employed by a hospital, it is manifest that a doctor in a junior position who refuses to carry out an operation which is against his conscience, but which is ordered by a superior medical authority is in a very difficult position. But the difficulty of the doctor's position is as nothing compared with that of the nurse.

I respectfully ask those who support the Bill to bear in mind that there is a shortage of nurses and that a considerable number of the nurses in our hospitals are Catholic girls who come from Ireland, and from a purely practical standpoint the administration and manning of hospitals may become more difficult if the spiritual advisers of young girls in Ireland tell them," Do not go and nurse in England because you will have to do things which are against your conscience." [HON. MEMBERS:" Oh."] I am not saying this happens. [An HON. MEMBER:" They are doing it now."] It would be a bad thing if it happened to an increasing extent.

The answer is that the more one extended the scope the graver the problem would be. Every abortion which is carried out has something to do with conscience. Catholic nurses cannot help that because all the abortions that are carried out in hospitals at present have been certified by doctors as being necessary for the health of the patients, and nurses are there, whether they are Catholics or otherwise, to look after the patients.

The second ground on which we seek to reject the Bill is that it contains no adequate safeguard against the destruction of potentially healthy babies. If one looks at Clause 1(1,b, and of the Bill, it is perfectly clear that this argument is justified. The very wording of paragraph makes it clear that if the Clause becomes law there will be a number of embryos capable of development and with a chance of developing into healthy human beings which will be destroyed.

Paragraph deals with the pregnant woman's capacity as a mother. It is perfectly clear that the health of the embryo and the likely physical future of the embryo is not one of the factors that will be taken into consideration at all. It is clear that under this Clause a number of potentially healthy human beings will be destroyed.

The more I give way the longer I shall be.

Of course it is, but it is present at the moment only where operations are carried out in accordance with the law where the life or health of the mother is at stake. In paragraph (c) there is no reference to the life of the mother. The hon. Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles was very frank in saying that it was not really a question of health, either. One of the fundamental objections to the Clause is that it makes doctors arbiters not of medical questions, but of social ones.

 Paragraph states: It is clear that none of these things necessarily prevents the child which is born from being a perfectly healthy one. There is no need to argue further, I trust, that the Bill seeks to legalise the destruction of a number of potentially healthy human beings.

Our third ground is the most difficult to argue and the most important. It is that the Bill would undermine respect for the sanctity of human life which is fundamental to British law. I do not altogether agree with the hon. Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles that the law of England is totally uncertain. However, I will not argue that aspect, because if there were a demand simply to clarify the existing law, although I would not think it necessary and although many doctors would say that any definition tends to restrict the freedom of the doctor to care for his patient, I myself would not oppose such a Measure. I would not oppose a Bill which provided as Clause 1 (1,a) provides and which made the necessary mechanical changes.

The Bill goes far beyond that. I ask the House to think of the question which will arise when, under the Bill, a woman complains that she has been raped and seeks the destruction of her child on that ground. We all know that very tragic and terrible cases of rape come before the courts. We also know that a great many charges of rape are made which are quite unfounded and which are made for quite different motives. Indeed, the late Queen Elizabeth, who was a lady of considerable, though not altogether orthodox, experience, always exercised the prerogative of mercy in cases of rape because she said that this offence was an impossible one. I would not go as far as that.

Let us look at Clause 2(4) and at what is to happen when a woman complains of rape. She will I have not been able to get a satisfactory answer from the dcotors whom I have consulted as to what is meant by" medical evidence of sexual assault". There are some cases where it is obvious what it would consist of, but there are others where it is very obscure. The danger of the Clause it is a terrible danger for the doctor is that it puts the doctor in the position of judge and jury as well.

The Bill draws in its provisions a sharp distinction between the born and the unborn child. Hon. Members, who would recoil with horror at the destruction of a live baby, are perfectly willing and anxious to legalise the destruction of embryos. I am told I may be wrong ; I know no medicine that three weeks after conception the embryo has a heart which beats. This seems to be as clear a case of the existence of an independent human life as it is possible to have. I cannot accept this distinction, nor has it been the position of either Christian countries or civilised countries in the past to accept this distinction.

It was that robust, anti-Catholic Pope who described abortion as a heinous misdemeanour. The path which the Bill seeks to tread would reverse the trends that we have tried painfully to build up in this and in other countries for respecting all human life as something sacred in itself.

I have spoken all too long. [HoN. MEMBERS:" Hear, hear."] I am glad to find agreement on that issue. I apologise to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the House for having done so. It would be wrong to leave out Of account altogether the emotional aspects of the Bill. The hon. Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles is, so far as I know, not yet a father. May I hope that he will become so. He may have a daughter.

I congratulate the hon. Gentleman, as I am sure the whole House will. If he has a daughter, she may grow up to have a vocation for nursing.

Let me ask the hon. Gentleman this question quite seriously. What does he think his feelings will be if his daughter becomes a nurse and if, when he sees her at the weekend and says," What have you been doing this week, darling?", she answers," I have been in the operating theatre terminating pregnancies"  

No, I am sorry. " and I have burned six embryos." Will the hon. Gentleman really [HON. MEMBERS:" Oh."] This is a serious debate. I ask hon. Members on this side to detach themselves a little from the physically comfortable life in the House, with its due order of movement from the debating Chamber to dining room and from dining room to Committee room, and project themselves to places where life may be more harsh and where the real actualities of these matters are undertaken.

I have spoken to several doctors, but I have not yet come across one doctor or one nurse who has not found this an abhorrent operation, however necessary they may have thought it to perform.

I ask the House to reject the Bill, because it is bad sense, bad law and bad ethics, but, above all, because it is emotionally and aesthetically repugnant.