I rise to oppose the Amendment and to give qualified support to the Bill. I must say that I find it very much easier to make lip my mind to oppose the Amendment than I do to decide how qualified is my support for the Bill.

My decision was rendered easier by the speech of the hon. Member for Plymouth, Sutton (Dr. David Owen). I think that I agreed with nearly everything he said. I found his attitude in marked and refreshing contrast to that of some of his hon. Friends who, from those who made interjections and sedentary noises to those who wholeheartedly opposed the Bill, suggested that it was their view that this was a simple matter and that anybody who did not accept the whole argument and the whole Bill was automatically obscurantist, inhumane and unintelligent.

This seems to me not only an arrogant, but a dangerous attitude. The hon. Member for Sutton rightly said that unless we realise that this is a subject which is very difficult, which has marginal implications and secondary effects arising out of almost every provision of the Bill, we shall not do it justice and we shall not eventually allow to emerge from the House a Measure which will work.

I hope that we shall come to a vote on Second Reading this afternoon and that no attempt will be made to talk out the Bill. We ought to thrash it out in Committee and on Report and to discuss what sort of Measure this ought to be.

I am sorry that my right hon. Friend the Member for Ashford (Mr. Deedes) is not here. I listened, as I always do, with great attention to what he said, because over the many years that I have know him I have come particularly to value the humane and yet penetrating way in which his mind works on social and moral problems of this kind. I want to try to explain to the House why, sharing most of the doubts that he has, I decided marginally that I would vote for the Second Reading of the Bill whereas he decided marginally that he would vote against it.

I believe it to be important that the statute law should codify the case law of the Bourne judgment and since. I know the arguments against interfering with the case law that it may rigidify the position and make it more difficult for doctors, but I believe that Parliament should place the position beyond doubt. If my right hon. and learned Friend the Member for Warwick and Leamington (Sir J. Hobson) or any other lawyer takes part in the debate, I hope that he will tell us whether the Bill places the position beyond doubt and whether it would codify it in the right way. I think that we ought to know about it and that it ought to be discussed in Committee.

I turn to the emotive content which is inevitable in the Bill. I, being subject to no religious dogma in this respect I am an Anglican cannot find it in me, and I do not believe I ever shall find it in me, to regard the non-viable foetus in utero as a human personality. I cannot say that I am right to believe this, but nobody can say that I am wrong. I am, therefore, left unmoved by talk of killing unborn babies.

It seems to me that this is to get the discussion on to altogether the wrong foot, because it concentrates attention in the most emotionally possible way on the act of termination of pregnancy without considering what is much more important  the results of doing it and the circumstances in which it is done. It seems to me that that is the only thing to which we ought to be directing our attention when we are discussing the Bill.

I have no hesitation at all no reservation in saying that I believe that, subject to proper safeguards, a pregnancy ought to be medically terminated when there is a clear and grave danger to the life or physical health of the mother. I have, as I think anybody must have, slightly more reservations when we come to mental health, despite the enormous advances in psychiatry not just in specialist psychiatry, but, what is perhaps more important, the increasing knowledge of or familiarity with psychiatric practice on the part of general practitioners. Because of this advance it is much less dangerous to give slightly more latitude here than once it was.

Nevertheless, as was said by the hon. Member for Sutton, who has much greater knowledge and experience than I have, there is a difficult borderline. It is very much a matter of experienced judgment not guesswork as to whether the sort of profound depression, amounting to dangerous melancholia at times, which many of us have seen in cases of quite normal pregnancy, can, in fact, be dealt with medically and whether the woman be brought to her term and helped to produce a happy, healthy child and to become once again a happy healthy mother. Sometimes she can, sometimes she cannot. But it is a very dicey decision to say whether she can or cannot, I suspect, and, therefore, to decide whether one should take the responsibility of terminating a pregnancy which might result in the birth of a normal, happy, healthy and useful child.

Those are all to a certain extent imponderables. One does not know what might have been if one had done such and such a thing or had not done it. It is almost the same problem as is exemplifield in Aldous Huxley's" Fifth Philosopher's Song":  It is a solemn thought.

When we go beyond the question of danger to life and physical and mental health, I find myself not wholly in agreement with the provisions in the Bill, but I go a little less far than some who have objected and a little further than others. For example, I accept Clause 1(1, ) unreservedly. This is one that I know has given some considerable difficulty and doubt to other hon. Members. I agree that this is something extraordinarily difficult to define, and it will be extraordinarily difficult to prove. Nevertheless, I believe that paragraph is right and that, subject to clarification and definition, this should form part of the Bill.

I find it almost impossible to accept paragraph in anything like its present form. I am sure that this will have to be changed in Committee, and I am almost certain that it ought to be taken out. My hon. Friend the Member for Birmingham, Edgbaston (Mrs. Knight), despite the uproar that it created opposite, was perfectly right, surely, in saying that this is not a problem which ought to be dealt with primarily by the termination of pregnancy. This is, as the hon. Member for Sutton said, a mater which one cannot consider in isolation from current attitudes towards contraception. The terrible social inadequacies in housing and the ignorance and prejudice about contraceptive practices which still persist therein, in the end, lie the solutions.

I believe that we may actually find that we are making these solutions more difficult to obtain if we give the idea that abortion is the answer to these problems and that it is something that can be made easier. The pressure to get an abortion in circumstances where it is a struggle for the mother, and where it is only too easy, goodness knows, to feel that the struggle is hopeless and intolerable, may distract attention from the needs for reform in other fields.

Paragraph is something like a lottery. I am prepared to accept some parts and not others. I accept" defective" , subject to legal advice about the adequacy of the existing statutory definition, as a proper reason for abortion. Again, recognising the difficulties of definition and proof, I absolutely accept rape as a reasonable cause for termination of pregnancy. I do not believe that it can be right to ask a young woman to bear a child whose father she did not choose and may not even know, and as a result of sexual intercourse which has been forced on her and to which she was not a consenting, willing partner.

With respect to the hon. Gentleman the Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles (Mr. David Steel), who said that under the law of Scotland sexual intercourse with a girl under the age of consent was treated as being equivalent to rape, I cannot accept that they are the same at all. I do not think that pregnancy of a girl under the age of 16 should automatically be regarded as a good legal ground for termination. The circumstances here are clearly different. One may perfectly well say, if talking of a girl of, say, 11 or 12 years, that the law says that she is under the age of consent, and, therefore, in a sense this puts it on the same, footing as rape and the victim of rape is not a consenting partner. Nevertheless, we all know that a 15-yearsold girl nowadays is very different from a child. It may have been, as the Prayer Book says, entered into lightly, wantonly and inadvisedly, but nevertheless the girl, if it was not rape, was a consenting party to sexual intercourse unless she was a defective, in which case she is dealt with separately presumed to have some knowledge of the risks and what the implications would be.

Nor do I accept that it automatically follows that the results of the pregnancy will be disastrous. After all, if the girl is liable to suffer serious physical or mental damage she is covered by paragraph . It seems to me that the chances are that the girl, if she is properly looked after and if her parents rally round and she is properly medically looked after, will have a successful pregnancy and a successful birth and produce a perfectly normal and healthy child.

There is seldom any difficulty about adoption in those cases. The girl may be none the worse for the experience. I am not at all sure that I believe that we should remove what is in a sense a useful sanction. I know that that perhaps sounds a heartless thing to say, but one needs to think twice before one removes all the consequences of folly from people. One does at least need to think what the implications are.

Having said all that, and having shown, I hope, that I want to look at the impli- cations of the Bill impartially, I hope that the House will decide to give the Measure a Second Reading so that the matters that I have raised can be discussed more carefully in Committee.

To conclude, my right hon. Friend the Member for Ashford and my hon. Friend the Member for Edgbaston were, I think, getting near to this point. I said that the implications, the secondary effects, of legislation of this kind need careful consideration. I hope that the House, when it takes responsibly the decision, as I hope it will, to legislate in this matter, will recognise some of the doors that it may be opening in the future. I think that all the intelligent people, whether they be religious and of whatever Church, or whether they are agnostics, atheists, rationalists or humanists whatever they may be would agree that one of the things which, in the next generation, will produce the most alarming and exercising social and moral problems is the increasing ability of men to interfere with the processes of nature and actually to control them.

These matters, whether it be in the case of nuclear fission or experiments, which will certainly succeed, to control the weather, raise problems, some of them social, others moral, which exercise us all. But when we come, as we are coming quickly, to the ability of science and medicine to control the evolution of humanity, we shall have to look at a new set of problems in terms of new categories of thought. This may seem far from the Bill, but I do not believe that it is.

There was a letter in this morning from a gynaecologist which illustrated the point which I am making. He supported the Bill really on the ground that it would open the way for medicine deliberately to try to improve congenitally the human stock by scientific means. I am not so optimistic or foolish as to believe that one can stop the progress of science in this way, for it is in the nature of man to ask questions. If he asks them, he will try to find answers to them. If he finds the answers, he will try to act on them. Nothing can stop man behaving in this way. But he had better watch out that some of the answers which he gets do not beg even larger questions.

 If medicine and science are to be able to control the evolution of humankind and produce mutations to carry out deliberately the practice of eugenic selection, then, without any question, somebody and it will in the last resort be Governments will have to decide how far they will control this for social and moral reasons. I think that what we are doing in the Bill may be the first decision that we have to take in this field. It is not an unimportant consideration, and I hope that the House will bear it in mind.