Would my hon. and learned Friend give way, so that I can make him hear the question? May I point out to him that the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists said more than he has given the House to understand it said. What it said very recently, in March this year, was that It went on to say: The Royal College went further than my hon. and learned Friend gave the House to understand it went.

Before the hon. Lady leaves that point 

Can the hon. Lady tell the House why, on 28th March, during the election campaign, she wrote a letter to all her constituents saying that she would support the reform of the abortion law on the grounds of the serious risk of a defective child being born, and also on the grounds of incest, or intercourse with a girl under 16? Was this just because it was during the General Election campaign and the hon. Lady wanted to get support from the electors? What is the hon. Lady's real view the one that she has expressed today, or the one which she expressed during her election campaign?

This has been one of the best debates to which the House has had the pleasure of listening for a long time. Like the hon. Member for Chelmsford, (Mr. St. John-Stevas), I think that it has been evidence of the House of Commons at its best.

We have had some very good speeches, and I should like, first, to congratulate my hon. Friend the Member for Bradford, East (Mr. Edward Lyons) on his maiden speech. As the hon. Member for Stratford-on-Avon (Mr. Maude) said, it was a difficult occasion on which to make a maiden speech, and my hon. Friend acquitted himself extremely well.

I should also like to thank my hon. Friend the Member for Falmouth and Camborne (Dr. John Dunwoody) who gave a considered medical opinion which was very valuable to the House. His contribution to the definition of the inadquate mother and the stresses and strains which a mother can undergo when she suffers too many pregnancies in the wrong circumstances was invaluable.

We have had evidence over many years, and from many different bodies, of the need and support of the country for a change of the law. As my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary said in his notable contribution to the debate, people are behind us in this step to change the law and to ma e it more humane and to remove some of the anomalies which inhibit both doctors and patients in the search for a solution to this problem. But the State and the law are concerned with all people and are not obliged to observe, although they should respect, the religious scruples of the minority. It is not for me to attempt to join in any of the religious arguments put forward today. I am not qualified to do so. Nor shall I bandy words with the hon. Member for Chelmsford about the assessed numbers of illegal abortions.

The Inter-Departmental Committee of almost 30 years ago accepted the figure of 50,000 illegal abortions a year. Of course, there has been variation in the figures put forward since, but the most recent National Opinion Poll, which, significantly, was carried out among women  and it is women who have babies and it is women who have abortions, legal and illegal, and it is women who are in a position to answer these questions makes it clear that there are about 40,000 a year and that in addition there are about 85,000 attempted illegal abortions a year, induced or attempted to be induced by the woman herself, or by the back-street illegal abortionist to whom desperate women will go.

The House should accept it as a basic fact that if a woman is so desperate that she believes that she must terminate her pregnancy, she will go to all lengths to do so and that whatever the House decides today, abortions will continue. We can accept that a tremendous amount of experience and knowledge has been gained during the last 30 years and when hon. Members ask for more information or suggest that we should have a Royal Commission, I ask them, in return, what the delay would produce and what further information we would get.

Nearly thirty years ago the comprehensive committee which spent some time on taking evidence from lay and medical bodies, and which was chaired by the then Mr. Norman Birkett, K.C., came out in favour of reform of the law. It recommended that the law should be reformed to safeguard doctors who terminated in good faith and to protect the mental and physical health or life of the patient. It said that it would welcome legislation to enable pregnancies resulting from rape to be terminated if a satisfactory solution could be found to the legal difficulties involved. Therefore, as long ago as 1939 a responsible committee recommended that rape should be a ground for termination of pregnancy, provided that the administrative and legal difficulties could be overcome.

In many countries where rape is a ground for termination in Western Europe, in Scandinavia, in Eastern Europe this difficulty has been overcome. I had the opportunity, only the week before last, in Stockholm, of having a long discussion with a member of the National Medical Board in Sweden, which is the board to which gynaecological, psychiatric and social workers' reports are referred when a woman applies for a termination of pregnancy. It is this board which decides whether the application shall be granted.

The provision in Swedish law is that the offence should be reported immediately, either to the police or to the doctor. and that then, provided that the social worker, the psychiatrist and the gynaecologist are satisfied during the course of their normal interviews with the patient, if she should discover later that she is pregnant, that the offence in fact took place, the termination is approved, irrespective of whether legal action takes place after the police investigate the complaint, and irrespective of whether a verdict is given in favour of the patient.

I am not suggesting that the House should consider introducing the rather cumbersome machinery which Sweden has introduced. It is interesting that the Swedes have now set up a commission to examine the question of liberalising their law, because they feel that their present system is too cumbersome and that too many women have to wait too long before termination can be carried out. I submit that we have evidence on which to go forward on this ground.

In relation to the Clause which deals with the abnormality of the foetus, again it must be borne in mind that the committee suggested that this should be a ground, and medical knowledge is now greater than it was 30 years ago. Much progress has been made by medical science during the last 30 years. There is much more evidence about foetal abnormalities and how these are caused. There is much more knowledge about the risk of physical or mental abnormality and about the ways of detecting these. Prediction can be made with some certainty about genetically determined disease and chromosomal disease and abnormalities.

As recently as Monday of this week hon. Members will have noticed a report of a considerable break-through in this respect, namely, an electronic device which can show the contents of the uterus without exposing the mother and the foetus to the dangers of X-rays. We also know that by the withdrawal of amniotic fluid from the uterus it is possible to examine the chromosomal structure. It is also known that serious defects like mongolism can be detected in this way. The B.M.A. Special Committee, which reported earlier this month, said that the risk of serious foetal abnormality should be included as a ground for termination in any amendment of the law. It is significant that, in the poll conducted among women recently. 91 per cent. were in favour of termination on this ground.

I cannot accept the view, put forward by the hon. Member for Birmingham, Edgbaston (Mrs. Knight), that a girl under the age of 16, in addition to having to undergo the sexual assault and the serious psychological trauma that takes place after the event, should also he compelled to bear the child. I cannot agree that the solution is to tell our young girls that they must not become pregnant. Our young girls will become pregnant and not from their own fault.

The community would be affronted if we were to say that a girl or woman compelled to submit to a sexual attack for which the law has severe punishment should be compelled by the same law to bear the result of that criminal offence and give birth to the unwanted child.

The National Opinion Poll carried out among women showed that 82 per cent. were in favour of termination on this ground, too.

But in considering this complex and difficult problem of abortion law reform, we have to consider the view of the child as well as of the mother and consider the age at which many young girls are now being asked to bear children. In 1964, there were 225 offences of unlawful intercourse under the age of 13 known to the police. There were almost 4,000 cases under the age of 16. Does not society owe its protection to these victims?

Last year, 4,000 girls under the age of 16, most of them still at school, had illegitimate babies. This is alarming doctors and social workers alike. Several local authorities have opened homes for unmarried mothers. Many schoolgirl mothers aged 11 and 12 are being cared for by local authorities. It seems to me that Sweden, Denmark and other countries which are prepared to relieve children of this age of unwanted pregnancies are very much more progressive than we are.

I am sorry, but I cannot give way. I must get on.

In the case of incest, as in the case of rape, proof is difficult, but I am sure that I speak for the sponsors of the Bill and its other supporters on both sides of the House when I say that we shall consider all the arguments that have been put forward in the debate and all the Amendments put down in Committee, that we shall do our best to reach an agreed wording of the difficult phrases and Clauses in the Bill and that we shall do everything in our power to make it possible for these provisions to be made.

My hon. Friend the Member for Pontypool (Mr. Abse), in a characteristically energetic and lively, though perhaps not very helpful contribution, drew attention to the dangers that can occur from this operation and the psychiatric disturbance that occurs after termination. I suggest that a good deal of the psychological disturbance that occurs on occasion after termination is due to the attitude of society to this problem and that this is inculcated when the unfortunate patient goes to hospital and finds that she is attended by doctors and nurses who disapprove on religious grounds and make her feel that she is guilty of a criminal offence.

I cannot accept that point of view. If society as a whole has a more reasoned, enlightened and sensible attitude to this difficult problem it will help these women who find that they have to seek the help of gynaecological surgeons for the termination of a pregnancy in the way outlined in the Bill.

Before I conclude I should say something that I think perhaps will counteract some of the speeches that have come from the Birmingham direction. We must consider what happens to some of the unfortunate unwanted children born into inadequate homes, disabled children, mentally defective children. They come into the care of the local authority. A research project has been carried out by a Birmingham University social worker, who shows that it is not uncommon for a child of this kind to have up to 10 different homes in five years.

The number of foster homes that have broken down has increased during the past few years, and he believes that children coming into care in this way are often more difficult and more disturbed, and that they are the delinquent adolescents. The delinquent adolescents become the parents of more unwanted delinquent adolescent children in the next generation, generating another cycle of cruelty and neglect.

We now find ourselves in a situation that is clearly unfair. The law is unenforceable ; it is one law for the rich and one for the poor. Those who know where to go and those who have the money with which to do it are able to have their terminations carried out in suitable circumstances by a gynaecologist, with very little risk to themselves.

The majority of women seeking termination of pregnancy are married