  

Perhaps I might just make one point. Would not my hon. and learned Friend agree that the situation at the moment is that the vast majority of legal abortions which occur, and also certain obstetric manoeuvres, which are, fortunately, not as frequently used now as in days gone by, involve the destruction of potentially healthy babies? This is the situation which is present at this moment.

I welcome this Bill which I believe to be a significant liberalising Measure. Perhaps it is apt that it should have been presented as ably as it has been from the Bench opposite. I should like to remind the House of what in fact this Bill proposes to do.

The position at the moment it that we have legal and illegal abortions. Admittedly the position at the moment depends mainly on case law. This Bill proposes to change the boundary between legal and illegal abortion, but we shall still have legal abortion and there will still be circumstances in which abortion will be illegal. We are, I admit, as one hon. Member opposite said, going to exchange one set of dilemmas for another.

It may be that doctors, members of my profession, will be faced with as difficult problems under the new law as those with which they are faced today in this field. But we cannot escape this at least we cannot escape this unless we advocate either the complete relaxation of the law so that abortion on demand becomes the law, something which I think public opinion is not ready for yet, or advocate regressive legislation in order to render all forms of abortion illegal.

I believe that the proposals in this Bill are in keeping with the feeling of the general public and in keeping with the general feelings of the medical profession as a whole. I should like to follow up three points which are raised in the Amendment. First, I take up the point of the independence of the medical profession being jeopardised by these proposals. I listened very carefully to my hon. and learned Friend the Member for Walsall, North (Mr. William Wells) who proposed the Amendment. He spoke at some length about divisions within the medical profession. Certainly divisions there are, in the same way as those of us who support this Bill are divided as to exactly how far we should go, but I believe there is very little difference of opinion among the great majority of doctors in this country that some form of liberalising legislation is necessary. But this division does not touch on the independence of the medical profession.

I tried to follow the argument of my hon. and learned Friend very carefully. It seemed that the whole case he was putting was based on the position of the junior hospital doctor and the position very simply of the doctor who had a religious or conscientious objection to taking part in abortions in hospital. Of course that doctor is facing that position today in legal abortions, and he has to face a very similar position in many other medical fields because medicine is about life and death. I believe that the attitude of the vast majority of doctors to their colleagues who have objections, particularly those with religious objections, to abortion is such that if the Bill is passed no junior doctor in any British hospital will be forced to do anything by his seniors which is obviously against his conscience.

I cannot see any reason why we should accept that the introduction of this Bill will threaten the independence of the medical profession. Indeed, I think the opposite is true and that it would give independence of action to the doctors and that doctors will be faced with a choice of avenues along which they wish to go.

The second objection which the Amendment raises is that this Bill does not contain adequate safeguards against the destruction of potentially healthy babies. I think that is basically an emotional argument and, as I said when I intervened earlier, the position under this Bill would be no different from the position now. We have legal abortion in certain circumstances. We also have rather complicated obstetric manoeuvres. happily much less frequently necessary. with modern surgical techniques Caesarean section in particular. Both involve destruction of essentially healthy babies. There is not any change proposed in this Bill in that regard. It is not a situation which any doctor welcomes, but this is the position at the moment and one should recognise that it is not proposed in the Bill to make any change in that regard.

Finally, the objection was raised that this Bill would undermine respect for the sanctity of human life. I would agree with the proposal of the Amendment that this is the most difficult and perhaps the most important part that we should be thinking about. There is, I hope, more to life than merely survival and we should be also thinking about the quality of that survival. I am thinking particularly of the mothers with large families and the burdens of large families very often with low incomes. Sanctity of human life to me does not mean just the human life of one individual. I like to think more of the family unit, of the mother and father and the children. I take it further than that and think of the community as a whole. If one looks at it in that light one can see that far from undermining respect for the sanctity of human life this Bill could enhance respect for human life in the fullest sense of the phrase.

The grounds for abortion which this Bill proposes are four groups, in paragraphs of Clause 1. Paragraph clarifies the state of case law under which the majority of doctors operate today. One should emphasise the majority because one of the illogicalities of the present situation is that the law is so vague that some doctors adopt one attitude and other doctors adopt a different one.

Paragraphs and give rise to difficulties in judgment. They are provisions which in Committee we should think about very carefully and go into rather deeply. In numerical terms, so far as the numbers of mothers are concerned, they are comparatively unimportant. The important proposals are contained in paragraph , which lays down the grounds of the mother's capacity being severely overstrained by the care of a child or another child. This is the social Clause, and I think it is the keystone to the whole Bill. Because of this Clause, I am supporting the Bill.

We heard from the mover of the Amendment that abortion was an abhorrent operation. I could not agree more with him as a doctor, but then so is so much else which doctors have to do. Because things are abhorrent we must not prevent people doing them if we think it is right that they should be done. I think there are circumstances where abortion for all its abhorrence is something which is right and proper to do.

The important incidental advantage of this Bill has been mentioned the incidental advantage that it will enable patients to consult their doctors more freely. All too often today, because of what people know about the legal situation, because people know that doctors are unable to offer abortions, unable to offer termination of pregnancy except in extreme cases, they do not go to their doctors. The mover of the Bill quoted a dramatic example, and I think there have been a number of similar cases of someone who imagined she was pregnant but feared to go to a doctor because she knew that little could be offered. Such a person may be tempted to secure an abortion and then subsequent events prove that she was not pregnant in the first place. This Bill would, I think, remove the barrier to medical advice caused today to a young woman or young girl who thinks, possibly rightly or wrongly, that she is in the early stages of pregnancy.

I have been for 12 years a doctor before I came to this House, and I had very considerable obstetric experience. I have been previously consulted, despite this barrier, by women who wanted abortion, women whom I believed morally and socially ought to have an abortion and whom this Bill would allow to have an abortion but, as things stand at the moment, I have had to refuse them. There was nothing I could do. It was quite pointless to refer them to any consultant. I do not believe that this is right for those with over-large families which could become larger still. In years to come the situation would be very much better if we passed this Bill.

As I understand it, it means capacity as a mother in the fullest sense. I think it means something much more than the ability to bear a child or to wean a child. It means the ability to be the person who brings the family together, who knits the various children and the mother and father together, so that the mother can play the part she ought to play in building and maintaining the family unit.

My belief is that in many cases today where we have over-large families the mother is so broken down physically and emotionally with the continual bearing of children that it becomes quite impossible for her to fulfil her real function, her worthwhile function as a mother, of holding together the family unit, so that all too often the family breaks apart, and it is for this reason that we have all too many problem families in many parts of the country.

The hon. Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles (Mr. David Steel) said that he had no children of his own and remarks were made by my hon. and learned Friend the Member for Walsall, North about how he might feel if he had a daughter. I have three children, including one daughter, and if my daughter wanted to become a nurse I would hope that she would be a nurse at a time when the law on abortion would be more enlightened and more rational and more realistic than it is today, and I would not be afraid if she were to come home and tell me of the things which the hon. and learned Member was so alarmed about.

Finally, I must say, as a doctor, that I support the Bill primarily not on medical grounds but social grounds. This is a piece of social legislation rather than medical legislation. I should like to congratulate the hon. Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles upon introducing this Bill. I think it is not always easy for a back bencher, particularly those of us whose security of tenure here is perhaps not as great as we would like it to be, to introduce as a Private Member's Bill a Measure like this.

It would have been very easy for the hon. Member to have selected one of those very pressing constituency problems which constituencies like his and mine possess in great numbers. He has shown his political courage. I think that his reward in years to come will be the silent gratitude of very many women.