May I begin my short intervention by congratulating, I am sure on behalf of the whole House, the hon. Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles (Mr. David Steel) on the manner in which he moved the Second Reading of the Bill. He did so with great moderation. He marshalled all the facts and arguments both fairly and clearly. His manner of presenting the Bill had the further advantage of being thoroughly unemotional.

This topic raises great emotions, as we have seen in the House today. This subject touches the origin and continuation of the human species. The only sound basis on which to approach legislation on this topic is the adoption of an unemotional approach to the real problems which the Bill presents to the House as a whole.

I want to make it clear from the outset that, though I speak from the Front Bench, I am not, on behalf of the Opposition, advancing any view one way or the other about the Bill. This is not only a Private Member's Bill, but it is one of those Private Members' Bills on which we all agree that there should be no party view. It should not be assumed that Private Members' Bills should not arouse deep and passionate party contentions. However, there are classes of Private Members' Bills which deal with moral and ethical questions affecting the individual citizen in relation to which it is right and proper that hon. Members should not adopt a party attitude.

The law on divorce has always been a matter for Private Members' Bills. It is desirable that other Bills dealing with issues of a moral and ethical nature and which affect the life of the individual citizen, rather than the community as a whole, should always be treated in the House when presented by a private Member not as matters for either party to deal with.

Therefore, I desire to make it clear that, though I speak from the Dispatch Box, the Opposition do not have a party line of any sort or description in relation to the Bill and it is left to the conscience of hon. Members on these benches, as I believe it is to hon. Members opposite, to vote exactly as they please.

Having said that, I want to put my personal view. The Home Secretary will follow me. He is in a slightly different position, because he will speak on behalf of the Government and with all the authority and knowledge of one of the Departments of State, though, apart from that position, he no doubt has his own private view. The House has always greatly benefited by the advice of a Minister speaking as a Minister, but we shall be interested to hear the right hon. Gentleman's personal views apart from those of his Ministerial responsibility.

The present law dealing with abortion requires clarification and amendment. To that extent, I welcome the Bill. I think that it is necessary that we should do something about the present law and that it is both necessary and desirable that it should be not only clarified, but also amended. To that extent, I greatly welcome the bringing forward of the Bill and the discussion of the subject today. It is of considerable importance to the public generally in their individual lives and the way in which they can or cannot receive medical help in dealing with the problems of parenthood and conception.

But I am bound to add that I feel the greatest personal qualifications about subsections and of Clause 1. I believe that it is not right to refrain from raising what might be considered to be Committee points under subsections and , for these are the substance of the Bill

Of course I am supporting the hon. Member for Kingston-upon-Hull, North (Mr. McNamara). I cannot see how one can consider the Second Reading without considering, also, what is included in those subsections. They are what it is about. One cannot claim that they are technical matters of drafting. They contain the substance of the effect of the Bill. To this extent, we must discuss the details of these pro- visions on Second Reading and hon. Members on both sides, whatever their views, have to make up their minds on subsections and , because they are what the Bill is about.

The drafting of the Bill, and its predecessors, has led to a great deal of pamphleteering and it is plain from the terms of the Bill that the people who are really affected are the medical profession. The Bill deals with the powers and responsibilities and duties of the medical profession under the law. To that extent, it is very important indeed, whatever other pamphlets have been written, that one should look at the authoritative pamphlets issued by the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and by the Special Committee of the B.M.A. While one may recognise that there are divisions within the medical profession, I place very great weight on the views of these authoritative committees of these two branches of the medical profession.

Subsection , as has been said, is no more than a fairly accurate, indeed, in my view, wholly accurate codification of the existing law of England as I understand it. My hon. Friend the Member for Stratford on Avon (Mr. Maude) asked me to express a view on this. I think that subsection does no more than what is generally understood in England to be the present law on the subject. I think that it is useful that the clarification should be put into statutory form. It is a good thing that we should put into a Statute what is generally understood. Neither the Court of Criminal Appeal nor the House of Lords has ever considered this subject and subsection will remove some anxiety from doctors in this respect, although I do not think that they need have very much.

Subsection deals with the question of the possible risk that a child may be born subject to a physical or mental abnormality and may be seriously handicapped. This raises a very different combination of conceptions. First, there is the question of the seriouness of the risk, and, secondly, there is the risk of serious deformity. These are two quite different subjects.

The ordinary law affecting people working in factories recognises this. One has to consider, first, not only whether there is a serious risk but whether, if one takes it, anything serious will happen. Secondly, one must consider whether the risk ought to be guarded against, because if anything happens there will be the most serious consequences. It is like a person walking along a narrow, dangerous wall only 6 ft. from the ground. That is a different matter from walking along such a wall 60 ft. high. In the one case, the risk may be acceptable because, although it is a serious risk, the consequences will not be very great. Conversely, if the consequences are to be utterly disastrous one should not accept the risk.

That is the great difficulty of putting, in a formula that will be comprehensible and must be applied by doctors, this conception that one must look at what are the chances and what will be the consequences. I think that the drafting of this provision might be capable of some minor improvements, but, substantially, I think that it does the right job. I think that many of us have taken the view, when we have considered this question in the light of medical knowledge, that the questions answers itself.

This may be no more than saying that doctors know which way they would operate it and that, whatever the formula, each individual doctor will form a view of the cases in which he will or will not think that the risk of deformity is so great that he should terminate the pregnancy. I do not think that we can go further than that, but we should give the doctors help and, therefore, we should support subsection as it stands.

On subsection , it has been made plain by many hon. Members who have spoken in its support that they intend to make it operate upon the basis that it will give doctors an economic or social judgment to do what they would think was right in social and economic conditions and, because of those conditions, to terminate a pregnancy. I cannot accept that that is a way in which we ought to legislate.

First, I do not think that it is right to commit to the hands of doctors decisions on social and economic problems which are to be solved by the termination of prospective life. The hon. Member for Falmouth and Camborne (Dr. John Dunwoody), who spoke with great experi- ence and feeling, said in express words that he desired to have the power to terminate a prospective life because he wanted to solve social and economic problems.

I have no doubt that the hon. Gentleman's judgments are good and that he is honest about them, but they may be wholly different from those that others in the medical profession or outside it would take of such topics. To that extent, it is not right that doctors should terminate life upon a judgment as to purely social and economic consequences. If that had been the law during the last 1,000 years, the number of persons born into this world might have been very substantially reduced, because we are constantly going through evolutions in our social and economic conditions and always, unhappily, a substantial proportion of the population are below the average that most people would like to see.

I certainly accept that that was one way of expressing the view of the hon. Gentleman, but I still do not think that it is an acceptable basis. One should not put into the hands of doctors the right to terminate a prospective life because in an individual case the mother has a social or economic problem that could face her in the future. I think that the drafting of the paragraph is very vague. I do not know what" capacity as a mother" means. I have never heard the phrase before. How long has that capacity to be overstrained one year, three years, ten years, six months? We do not know anything about that. The paragraph gives to doctors to apply in individual cases pretty well whatever views they may take on difficult questions and I do not think that it is right to place on the medical profession generally the right to take these decisions 

We want to proceed as quickly as possible, and I know that the Secretary of State for the Home Department wishes to speak.

On paragraph , I have a great deal of doubt about whether it is right to terminate a pregnancy because the mother is a defective. If, however, the reason is given that there is a strong possibility that the mother being a defective may suffer serious consequences as a result of having the child, why cannot ,he be dealt with under paragraph (a)? If, on the other hand, the reason is the risk that the child itself will be seriously handicapped, then this point is already dealt with under paragraph (b). While I see the arguments, which are quite good, I should have thought that the fact that the mother is a defective will be fully covered by and and this part of paragraph is unnecessary and superfluous.

The next point is that concerning a woman who becomes pregnant while under the age of 16. I concede that there are very many circumstances in which the physical and mental development of the mother is one which would lead any doctor to terminate the pregnancy I am happy to leave it to any doctor to say under paragraph whether the consequences to a mother who is young, and exceedingly young, are such that she should have her pregnancy terminated. I do not even mind if he decides that a girl over 16, who is very immature, both physically and mentally, should have her pregnancy terminated. I cannot see that the age of 16 has any magic.

The medical profession is well able to apply the tests in parapraphs and to the question of the youth of the mother. While it can be a very difficult question, it is not the youth in terms of age, it is the youth of the child in terms of physical and mental maturity or immaturity which is important, and this can all be dealt with under paragraphs and (b).

Finally, there is the question of whether conception as a result of a rape should automatically place upon the doctor the right to abort, or the difficult duty of refusing to abort. It is almost impossible to decide this question since conception may have taken place as a result of intercourse obtained by force or by fear or by fraud. The idea that one has to have medical evidence that a lady has been raped is wrong, when one remembers that a woman can be raped by fear or fraud, when no physical or medical evidence will exist that that has occurred.

Therefore, paragraph is unnecessary and one comes back to the problem raised by my hon. Friend the Member for Stratford-on-Avon, whether a raped woman should be allowed to bear a child, when she might not even know the father, has never consented to have her child and did not want it. Almost all those cases would also be covered by paragraph . This was the way in which the pregnancy was terminated in the Bourne case. There are very difficult questions of administration of the law in deciding when there has or has not been a rape. I would prefer to stand on paragraph , but if there were a way in which doctors could decide whether or not a lady had been raped I would be content to allow the provision on rape to go in.

When one considers the attitudes of the professions in the two pamphlets I have mentioned, it is noteworthy that the proposal of paragraph is not supported either by the Royal College or by the B.M.A. Both make it clear that they do not support the termination of pregnancy for non-medical reasons and that they think that it would be most unfair to place any such burden on doctors. I agree with that view.

They also do not support any of the proposals under paragraph (d). On the question of the girl being under the age of 16, the Royal College of Obstetricians is against any such provisions, and the B.M.A. strongly disapproves of putting any age into the Bill. On rape, they both take the view that there are very difficult administrative problems.

Having adopted the view that I have to the various paragraphs, I find myself in a considerable difficulty. It is a difficulty that many hon. Members are in. I like much of the Bill. I am strongly in favour of paragraphs and and think that we should approve them. But what do I do about paragraphs and ? The hon. Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles has made it plain that he is not proposing to take any steps that will get rid of paragraphs and .

It is important, in considering what we should do about the Bill, to consider what is likely to happen in Committee. That is very likely to be controlled by the proposers and supporters of the Bill, and if they are not prepared to give any undertakings that they will try to improve both paragraphs and I would find it difficult to support the Bill.

If one does not know whether any Amendment will be made, one has a real problem. In my position, I find it very difficult to say that one should at this stage vote for a Bill when one has not the faintest idea of what will happen in Committee. It may well come back from Committee with those Clauses in and that would be objectionable.

We all know that when a Bill has gone through Second Reading and Committee the chances of defeating it on Third Reading are almost nil. To that extent, this is a very difficult problem.

 I am in a middle position in which I greatly approve of part of the Bill and do not approve of the rest. I shall listen to find out whether any undertakings can be given to help me on paragraphs and , but so far they have not been given. This is the problem which affects all of us. We have each separately to make up our minds on the Bill, which is of great importance. I am glad that it is being treated on an entirely nonparty basis.