It is very pleasant and very easy to congratulate the hon. Member for Bradford, East (Mr. Edward Lyons) on his maiden speech. As he told us, he deliberately embarked on a very brave course of action. He waited until a controversial Bill of this complexity came before the House before he made his maiden speech. I recall no maiden speech which has been addressed to a more difficult subject and I think that he has acquitted himself splendidly. The House will look forward to hearing from the hon. Member again.

 I also congratulate the hon. Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles (Mr. David Steel) who, whatever view one may take about the Bill, moved its Second Reading in an irreproachable manner. I want to acknowledge at once the very fair way in which he put forward a Bill on this very difficult subject.

It is an even more difficult subject for those who, like myself, have the strongest and even decisive reservations about these proposals. I think that the first instinct of a layman, who is not a doctor or a lawyer, and cannot speak authoritatively for the Church, is really to steer clear of the subject altogether. That is much the easiest course. Yet I do not think that it would be right, which is why I now seek briefly, and however indifferently, to explain why I cannot support the Bill as it stands and, I am quite clear in my mind, is likely to remain.

The case for clarifying the law is compelling I accept that at once. The reason most often and urgently advanced for the change is the suffering, mental and physical, inflicted on numberless women who resort to illegal operations and the human misery that is occasioned. That is indeed compelling, and there is no need to argue the statistics, not all of which I accept at their face value.

To me, hardly less strong is the intolerable position in which, admittedly, the present law places many members of the medical profession. It seems to me intolerable, because in a great many instances doctors today are confronted with a choice between humanity and illegality, and they work here in a very big dark area rather uncertainly lit by a certain amount of case law. I stress this, because it has seemed to me that in a great deal of discussion on this subject doctors have been treated as subsidiary agents, agents to perform whatever we may consider right or wrong. I cannot accept that. This profession 

That is the point. I am saying that a great deal of argument that I have heard on this subject implied that doctors are agents who would be subsidiary to the will of Parliament.

As the right hon. Gentleman well knows, the medical profession comprises a great diversity of men, diverse in their religious outlook and the application of their medical skill under the medical code of ethics to which they all adhere, and men who are left with a great deal for individual conscience to decide.

There may be a consensus among doctors on this subject, but it is unwise to calculate here too much by consensuses. Certainly, there is a minority of doctors averse to the termination of pregnancies in any circumstances. There must be a majority who strongly support the termination of pregnancies in particular circumstances. There is another minority, a small minority, willing to consider termination of pregnancies without too close regard to circumstances. I would only stress that there is a need to bring them into account in a matter which goes so close to the heart of medical ethics.

I turn to the Bill itself. Like the hon. and learned Member for Walsall, North (Mr. William Wells), I should not be opposing the Bill if it consisted only of Clause 1 (1, ). I think that was the point that the hon. and learned Gentleman made in moving his Amendment. I accept Clause 1 (1, ). It is only in the knowledge that it cannot and will not stand alone in the Bill that I think it right to adopt the attitude which I do adopt to the Bill itself, because, reluctantly, I cannot accept the remaining three paragraphs of Clause 1(1) in the same way.

My own instinct is against even paragraph . Granted, medical science can now forecast foetal abnormalities with greater certainty than ever before, and the certainty is becoming greater all the time. It seems to me a very big decision, and it must always be a medical decision, to declare that a life must be condemned unseen. But I am persuaded by the attitude of the medical profession itself and by members of my own Church that the law should be changed. Well, so be it.

 I reject paragraph because it would give rise to the gravest administrative difficulties. I am not alone in thinking that. It would also give rise sometimes to a conflict of medical ethics. There would obviously be, in the category of paragraph , extreme cases which might often be covered by paragraph and by paragraph , which brings me decisively against the Bill.

Paragraph is too widely drawn and too vague, and seems to take away from the medical profession with one hand what we seek to proffer with the other. It exchanges one set of dilemmas for another. The hon. Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles, in dealing with this paragraph, admitted that it was controversial. It was the so-called social provision. But he said that to leave it out would be to leave a great area of uncertainty, to leave the medical profession in an area of doubt.

With respect, I suggest to him that it does the reverse of clearing up those matters. It is too imprecise. I reach these apparently illogical conclusions for the following reasons. To me, paragraph is in a class apart, because it touches life itself. It will often, though not in every case, represent the balance of one life against another. I am aware that there are hon. Members whose religious beliefs render them unable to weigh it even in that light. I respect this, and they will speak for themselves ; but I do not share their view. In effect, paragraph applies the severest compromise compatible to those who feel deeply about the sanctity of human life, and feel disquiet at some of the views now current in that regard. For that reason, I put it apart from the others. I think that it is administratively feasible, fair to the medical profession and it is to me this is an individual matter morally defensible.

That said, what should one's attitude be to the Bill as a whole? The most agreeable and easiest course would be to give it conditional support. But the hon. Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles has been very fair to the House about his attitude to Committee. He indicated that those who are opposed to the Bill should not seek by Amendment or by some other means the course that they desire. One cannot be opposed to half the provisions, give unqualified sup- port, to a quarter of the Bill and reluctant support to a quarter, and then offer conditional support. Therefore, I reluctantly oppose.

I hope that no hon. Member, whether supporting or opposing the Bill will be too sanguine about the Bill's effect in any form in ending the danger, the squalor, the misery of illegal abortions. No one could deny that the Bill, if it passes into law, will make a contribution. But short of comprehensive legislation, permitting abortion in all circumstances, almost as of right, some evasion of the law is inevitable. It may be said that the wider we take the law the fewer evasions there will be. That seems to me to be a dangerous doctrine. I grow rather mistrustful of the doctrine that the right cure for social abuse is to legalise it with suitable restraints. We tried that once with gambling, and the experience there does not encourage me to apply that doctrine in this far more difficult subject.

We should not consider the Bill without awareness of some streams of current thinking. It may well be that science and its little pill will enable so-called civilised countries to treat sex more and more as a sport and less and less as a sacrament in love, a divine instrument of procreation. It may well be, in fairness, that the Bill stops far short of that, but it is that consideration that gives me pause now. That is why I think we should do what is absolutely necessary to give more guidance to doctors to clarify matters, but not more than is necessary. The right answer, if there is one, is almost certainly the hardest answer, and probably, to the majority of people, the unacceptable answer.