In the Declaration of Human Rights, passed in Plenary Session of the United Nations in 1959, there appeared the following resolution: This quotation contains not only the essence of Christian belief, not only the common law of our land, but, from the nature of the Assembly which passed it, the common law of humanity. This is what the Bill seeks to change, for if it does nothing else it legalises the taking of human life.

I find it tragic that so many hon. and right hon. Members who in the last Parliament walked through the Lobby in support of the outlawing capital punishment could at the same time support the Bill before us today. Had I been a Member of the House then, the same motives which would have taken me into the Lobby in support of my hon. Friend the Member for Nelson and Colne (Mr. Sydney Silverman) would make me reject this Bill. There are many hon. Members who wish to speak. I would prefer to continue with my argument. I have sat here since 11 o'clock this morning listening to the debate and wanting to interupt, but I did not do so. I ask for the same courtesy from other hon. Members.

In of 20th July there was printed a letter from Dr. Bernard Towers, Tutor and Director of Medical Studies at Jesus College, Cambridge, in which he wrote: Later he said: This is part of the case which the proposers of the Bill must answer. But it is only part of the case, for they must justify not only the principle but also the content and, indeed, the purpose of the Bill.

I think that the proposers of the Bill would say that it has three main aims. As I summarise them. I hone that I do no injustice to their case. If I do, I will willingly give way. As I see it, they rest upon three main arguments: first, that there is need for certainty in the law: secondly, that the present law if rendered certain is inhumane inhumane because there are many cases in which motherhood will impose severe emotional strains inhumane because the child is likely to be born abnormal or defective: inhumane because the circumstances of the conception are such as to render the birth of the child repugnant to the mother, her family or society at large: inhumane because the law insists on a woman bearing an unwanted child.

In its extreme form, I think that this argument becomes the alleged right of every expectant mother to decide whether her child shall be born or destroyed, but I grant that the Bill does not go this far. Finally, they say that it is inhumane because many women suffer great pain and hardship because they have had to have recourse to a back-street abortionist. The third reason which the proposers of the Bill put forward is that the administration of the law has broken down, that it is neither respected nor obeyed. I could never defend a situation in which there is one law for the rich and another for the poor.

 I should like to deal in detail with these three points. The first is that the law should be certain. This demand seems to me to be largely synthetic. It does not seem to come from the medical profession itself. Indeed, the report of the Royal College to which so many hon. Members have referred specifically states: Later, i t states: Further, the report of the Special Committee of the B.M.A. on Therapeutic Abortion argues that the cases in which abortion is necessary to preserve the life or physical health of the mother are now far fewer than they were 30 years ago. There are cases in which the mental health of the mother is said to justify it, but these, too, are decreasing as psychiatry advances. I agree that on medical grounds there seems to be a fair balance between these points.

The second point is the argument as to the inhumanity of the present law. I wish to deal briefly with the problem of the back-street abortionist. I will deal later with paragraphs and of Clause 1(1). But if the Bill covers only the grounds which are in Clause 1 there are still many cases which will make necessary recourse to the back-street abortionist. If, on the other hand, this is not so, then the Bill, if passed, which I hope it will not be, will not be rigorously enforced and we are merely legislating to make a mockery of ourselves and finding a pretext of one form or another to allow mothers to be aborted apparently legally with adequate medical safeguards.

Will we with this legislation reduce illegal abortions or eliminate them altogether? Foreign experience seems to suggest to the contrary. In Japan, Sweden and Hungary, there has not been a reduction but an increase, due apparently to a woman's desire for secrecy and haste and a climate of opinion which regards abortion as a trivial affair, although I agree that there might be some substance in the case advanced by the hon. Mem- ber for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles (Mr. David Steel) and his comment about the Swedish medical boards.

That may be the case. In view of the nature of much of this evidence, we do not know, because these are not Government statistics, but I would be prepared to accept that. I think I am also right in saying that in Sweden the climate of opinion seems to be going against legal abortion in that the numbers are falling, but one can draw what conclusion one likes from that.

Let us also consider the difficulties and dangers of widening the grounds for abortion. In its report the Royal College points out that the danger of death from abortion is more than it is with normal birth, that the danger of non-fatal but serious complications is as high as 3 per cent., and that there is a danger from postoperative psychoses which is variously estimated at between 9 and 59 per cent. ; and even 9 per cent. is alarmingly high. I agree that there is a very delicate argument, a very nice argument, but the danger here is that these psychoses are, unfortunately, very difficult to treat, because they often arise from a feeling of guilt which all too clearly has a factual basis, being based on the denial of the maternal instinct and the natural law and I put it no higher than that. 'This is a fact which the supporters of the Bill on this ground should weigh most carefully when they advance the argument of the need for abortion as a cure for the psychoses of pregnancy.

I come now to administration. No one would deny that the present law is flouted, but we are entitled to ask whether the machinery proposed in the Bill would be sufficient. Certainly it contains far less than the Bill introduced in another place by my noble Friend Lord Silkin. It lacks precision of definition, a point to which I shall come later, and it is certainly less strict than the Royal College itself would have it. One must ask why there is reluctance about asking for a consultant's opinion and I agree that there is a technical argument about weight of numbers and so on but one is therefore entitled to ask, the present state of the law being what it is, how many general practitioners have specialist knowledge of abortion in theory. From the state of the law as it is, very few should have it in practice.

Again, where does the medical profession stand if women in certain instances can claim abortion of right, as they could under the Bill? This is an important consideration which has been developed before and to which the institution to which my hon. Friend belonged made an important reference when it mentioned the possibility of the psychiatrist or doctor becoming a mere technician if people could demand this as a right. I put the argument no higher than that. Medical opinion is disagreed about it.

I turn now to Clause 1, in order to make not Committee points, but points of substance. Clause 1(1,a) would appear to be declaratory of the existing law. This would be something which, while from my own ethical point of view I would not like to see it, I would certainly not try to oppose or obstruct. But subsection (1,b) immediately suggests difficulties. The phrases which are used" substantial risk" ," seriously handicapped"  are difficult to interpret and are incapable of precise definition. What exactly does" substantial risk" mean? When Lord Brain wrote his commentary on the first Bill of Lord Silkin in the he pointed out the difficulties which their Lordships have had medically and legally in trying to find a meaning. It is almost impossible to give a definition. How are we to measure this? Where do we draw the line?

Rubella was mentioned earlier and the 30 per cent. chance of a child being born deformed, but what of the other 70 children in that statistical 100? What does the phrase" seriously handicapped" mean? Serious abnormality in pregnancy is now being diagnosed very easily, but although it is being diagnosed very easily this should not overcome the fact that it is still extremely difficult to diagnose abnormality in early stages of pregnancy. For example, when one takes X-rays and the child's bones are then visible, the pregnancy is so far advanced that the child is viable. In certain forms of growth abnormality, the child may not be viable, being a full monster, and in such cases it is often safer to let the pregnancy go full course rather than terminate it and possibly risk the mother's life.

There is the more important question  what of the foetus? I mean more important not in relation to the mother's life, but what of the foetus, of the child for all its handicaps made in the image of God? How are we to judge whether the potential child would have any reasonable prospect of enjoying life?

There is a facile assumption that the presence of a severe abnormality like spasticity or mongol characteristics must inevitably deprive a child of enjoyment of life. Yet they cherish their lives. Those who have read the debates on similar Bills in the other place cannot fail to have been moved by the quotation of a letter in the by the noble Lord Iddesleigh:  One must balance a statement like that against the very often tragic and emotional arguments concerning the strains and stresses upon parents.

It is also strange that abnormalities which we are able to diagnose within the womb we are prepared to terminate, while those which cannot be diagnosed until after birth we are to let live, things like epilepsy, biochemical disorders and mental defects. Who are we to judge to say that those who are born abnormal but not diagnosed should live, while the child who may be born blind or deaf because its mother may have contracted German measles or had a sweat rash is to be condemned to die? Who are we to make the judgment? Who is the mother to make the judgment?

Those who talk about the abnormalities of rubella ought also to remember the advantages of gamma globulin and its effect in the early treatment of rubella. Nor should one forget that under this Clause many a normal child may be sacrificed in order to avoid the risk of bearing a handicapped child. It is too high a risk to run and it is too high a price to pay.

Subsection (1, ) contains the phrases" capacity as a mother" and" severely overstrained". Again, these are terms which are impossible to interpret or to limit, and they are to some extent ludicrous. How can a woman's capacity to be a mother be measured before she has a child? Fecklessness, a bad background, being a bad manager these are handicaps, but they are nothing to do with love, that indefinable bond, no matter how bad the social conditions, no matter how strange or difficult the circumstances, which links a mother to her child and makes her cherish it.

The social argument based on bad housing, poor wages, to justify abortion strikes me as a very sad argument coming from these benches. I came to the House to get a better human deal, to get decent and improved family allowances, to redistribute wealth, and to help people in just these circumstances. This is a bad argument and again I say that it does not come well from these benches.

The hon. Lady the Member for Birmingham, Edgbaston (Mrs. Knight) has already covered many other objections which can be made to this subsection. I shall not cover that ground again. I turn to Clause 1(1,d) which provides, amongst other things, for termination of pregnancy where suffering from subnormality under Section 4 of the .

It is popularly thought, not without some ground, that a mother as mentally defective as defined in the Acts is more likely than a normal woman to have a mentally defective child in the sense of the 1959 Act and to be more likely of being incapable of rearing such a child. While this broad generalisation cannot be disputed, it is another matter whether or not this should be regarded as adequate grounds for terminating a pregnancy. With slighter degrees of subnormality, the transmission of defectiveness varies tremendously and many healthy and normal children are born to such mothers.

Once it was thought that intelligence was a fixed quantum that did not rise. This is now open to grave doubt as the influence of environment and other factors are changing the face of medicine. Children of less afflicted subnormal parents may, if reared in the right circumstances, reach average or above-average intelligence. Indeed, many normal children are born to mothers of the middle and slighter degrees of mental subnormality. One must again ask: are these, too, to perish?

The Bill makes no provision for the intelligence level of the father, and it has yet to be proven that the intelligence level of the father is not in some way related to the intelligence of the offspring. But, above all, this part of the Clause leaves the mentally defective woman the prey of men of mean and base instincts, something which is very reprehensible.

The hon. Lady the Member for Edgbaston has referred to pregnancies of girls under 16. My hon. and learned Friend the Member for Walsall, North (Mr. William Wells) spoke of the legal difficulties of proving rape.

May I, as my last point on the contents of the Bill, refer to Clause 1 (4). This is a dangerous provision. First, there is no definition of" freshly" in the phrase I do not wish to elaborate this point, because I do not think I ought to, except to say that to my knowledge it has no scientific meaning on any time scale and has not yet been used as a term of art within the law.

But the phrase is another matter. The question has already been raised of the difficulty of proving rape legally. My medical informants tell me that tearing, scratching, bruises, are not uncommon accompaniments of normal sexual intercourse. Here the doctor, on the uncorroborated evidence of his patient, is to be placed in the position of judge and jury. It is an impossible position for him to be placed in and the whole of this subsection begs the question of the proof of rape.

Finally, where applicable there is no mention in the Bill of the father's consent to his wife's being aborted. This is a serious lapse, because the child is the child of both the parents and the responsibility of each of them from conception until it has established for itself a life of its own independent of them, when it has matured into adulthood, remains undiminished. This is a serious omission.

I have spoken at length on some of the what might be termed Committee points of the Bill because of what the hon. Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles said in moving the Bill about the attitude he would take to people who were opposed to it. I have therefore felt that I must elaborate this case, because there are many points of substance which legally I do not think bear examination, besides the objections that I have from my own convictions.

I do not regard many of these what might be termed Committee points as minor points. It is not certain that I, at any rate, will be able to make these points in Committee. I therefore felt that I should make them now so that, in case the hon. Gentleman is not already aware of my attitude, he should be made aware of it.

I apologise to hon. Members for having spoken at length, but to me the sanctity of life of both the mother and the unborn child is of such importance, and the Bill is such a bad Bill, striking at the very roots of my concept of life and of man, that I felt that I had to make my case in some detail, lest it should go by default. I support the Amendment.

I only made the point because of what the hon. Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles (Mr. David Steel) said in moving the Second Reading.

I appreciate the point that my right hon. Friend is making, but would he not agree with me that in the normal family unit the child is the responsibility of both the father and the mother, and that the father's wishes in this matter must also bear very gravely on this issue, as well as the mother's, though I grant that it is the mother who has the primary interest, as having to bear the child in the womb?