While paying tribute to the good and sincere intentions behind this Bill, may I assure the House that the intentions of those who support the Amendment are also good and sincere.

When I first knew that this Bill was being introduced I was very sympathetic. Perhaps the House will allow me to claim that I am in rather a special category in that I am one of the very few people here who is physically capable of appreciating to the full exactly what an unwanted pregnancy can mean. I have been engaged in social work for some years and have heard many heartbreaking stories from women about this, because women will talk very openly indeed to other married women in their own age group who have families. So I started out with built-in sympathy with certain parts of the Bill, but the more expert evidence I read and heard the more worried I got. The more I have talked to doctors, gynæcologists and psychiatrists, about this Bill, the more I have come to feel that it is a bad Bill.

Mr. Wilfred Mills of the circulated 68 gynaecologists and obstetricians in the Birmingham area, over 90 per cent. of whom were not Roman Catholics, nor is he a Catholic incidentally, and, as has already been said, nor am I. Out of the 68 he found that three thought this change in the law desirable, three were for it and 65 were against it. Those are clinical and not religious views.

I should say that I have never supported abortion on demand. Although I have been sympathetic to this Bill, I could never go all the way with the suggestion that there should be abortion on demand, which, of course, is what subsection (1, ) actually means. This subsection is so wide and so loose that any woman who felt that her coming baby would be an inconvenience would be able to get rid of it.

There is something very wrong indeed about this. Babies are not like bad teeth to be jerked out just because they cause suffering. An unborn baby is a baby nevertheless. Would the sponsors of the Bill think it right to kill a baby they can see? Of course they would not. Why then do they think it right to kill one they cannot see? It seems to me that this is a most important point. I have come to believe that those who support abortion on demand do so because in all sincerity they cannot accept that an unborn baby is a human being. Yet surely it is. Its heart beats, it moves, it sleeps, it eats. Uninterfered with, it has a potential life ahead of it of 70 years or more ; it may be a happy life, or a sad life ; it may be a genius, or it may be just plain average ; but surely as a healthy, living baby it has a right not to be killed simply because it be may inconvenient for a year or so to its mother.

 Our reformists appeal to humanity in ridding a woman of an unwanted pregnancy, but they utterly fail to recognise the inhumanity of abortion itself. If we agree that we should have abortion simply because a mother feels she cannot cope with caring for her child, what about the other end of the scale? And it is important to talk about this because plenty of sons and daughters who are grown up and married feel they cannot cope with their elderly parents. Should they be put down, too? [HON. MEMBERS:" Oh."] It is an utterly inhuman doctrine, yet it would be a perfectly logical next step after this Bill.

Once we accept that it is lawful to kill a human being because it causes inconvenience, where do we end? Society, or at any rate the majority in this House, has already conceded that the life of a convicted murderer shall be preserved. How can we possibly agree to that and yet kill the most innocent of all things, an unborn baby? It just does not seem to be logical.

After all, there are two ways round an unwanted pregnancy. First, there is family planning. Birth control methods are becoming safer and easier all the time. I absolutely reject the argument used by some emotional do-gooders that poor people do not understand how to use contraceptives. Of course they do ; they are not stupid. I am 100 per cent. in favour of family planning clinics and every bit of advice and help possible being available, but there is every difference in the world between deliberately not starting a baby and deliberately killing one which has been started. People must be helped to be responsible, not encouraged to be irresponsible.

The second way round the problem is to extend considerably the help and support to women who are in the throes of unwanted pregnancy. One of the most learned and experienced consultants in Birmingham area, Mr. Myre Sim, consultant psychiatrist to the Birmingham Group of Hospitals, says this: He goers on to discuss the fact that a number of people with knowledge and experience in this field do not abort on psychiatric grounds and says: This man has no axe to grind, not even on religious grounds. His sole concern is the welfare of his patients. His very wide knowledge and experience makes him a man to whom we should listen.

The House will appreciate that until now I have been speaking solely on subsection (1, ). I want now to speak briefly on the problem of the child mother. When a girl under 16 

This is a subject about which it is not advisable to get emotional, if I may say so. I have tried, sincerely and honestly, to assess the evidence which I have been given. That seems to be perfectly fair.

I wish now to speak about the girl under 16. Does anyone think that the problem of the 15-year-old mother can be solved by taking the easy way out? This category which comes under subsection (1,d) is almost negatived a little later in the Bill by Clause 3(1), because in nine cases out of ten a girl of this age who finds that she is having a baby does not tell anyone that she is pregnant until about the fifth month, by which time she would not be able to get an abortion under the Bill anyway, and by which time having an abortion would be very dangerous. Even supposing that she is the tenth girl and does tell, here is the case of a perfectly healthy baby being sacrificed for the mother's convenience.

Of course, it is a tragedy that little girls should have babies when they are only 12, 13, or 14 or even 11. But is it morally right to destroy one child to help another, and is having an abortion all that much better than having a baby which, after all, if the mother wants, will quite easily be adopted by parents who want it deeply and will give it a good life? For goodness sake, let us bring up our daughters with love and care enough not to get pregnant and not let them degenerate into free-for-alls with the sleazy comfort of knowing," She can always go and have it out". I do not know why hon. Members opposite are clucking. That is no more than the truth.

I have had a great many letters from doctors since it was stated in the Press that I supported the Amendment, and I should like to quote briefly from one of them. It is from Professor McLaren, Head of the Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology at Birmingham University. The argument that abortion should be possible where there is a reasonable chance of the child being born deformed is one which, on the face of it, we could all support. Yet that is not easy, because who is to say that a child with a club foot or a spastic child is not fit to live? Who is to say that he cannot enjoy life? I have seen plenty of spastics who appear to be thoroughly enjoying life. There is something utterly repugnant to me here, because it so reminds me of Hitler's conception of a race of perfect physical specimens. Is it right that only the physically perfect should be allowed to survive? We should be careful how we answer that one.

 Then again, I understand that it is often not possible to say with any certainty that the child is deformed or a monster until abortion is too late for safety. Abortion is frequently an extremely dangerous operation. Obstetricians hate it. I know from my post that they detest and fear the thought of this Bill becoming law. That is partly because of the danger and partly because they hold in great reverence the solemn oath which they have all sworn to preserve life.

In that connection, I want to quote from another letter: I believe that a mother should have an abortion if her health is endangered ; but that, of course, is already done, and, if it is necessary to make that more clear, I would support it wholeheartedly. I believe that, if it comes to a choice between the mother's life or the baby's, the mother is very much more important. She has ties and responsibilities to her husband and other children. I believe that abortion should take place where a woman or girl has been raped. I believe that the back-street abortionist is an evil, but evidence exists which proves that making abortion legal does not end back-street abortions. I believe that an extra pregnancy can be a wretched thing for a woman with a large family already, but there are other ways of tackling the problem than the extreme one of abortion, and it is far more preferable and humane to help women not to start babies at the beginning than to say," It is all right. Do not worry. You can always have an abortion."

I am afraid that I cannot give way any more. I have given way once and I am trying to be brief.

One thing above all that I have learned about abortion is these last few weeks is that we do not know enough about what is involved. Like other hon. Members, I have had letters from women's organisations and independent women, and it is clear that the people who have written have not read the Bill. They start, as I did, with enormous sympathy and emotional judgment. But we must judge from knowledge and not emotion.

In the present climate, suitably prepared with heavily slanted propaganda, it may be that society says that a woman should have an abortion on demand and that if excuses are wanted for the squeamish they can be easily invented. Those responsible for administering our society should behave responsibly. Yet we see Private Members' Bills introduced to both Houses before there has been an adequate collection of evidence by an independent tribunal. If we are to change the law, it should be done by a society which is fully informed of the facts. At present, this country has had information only from the mass media in the form of radio and television programmes and Press reports.

I have been reading from a letter which was sent to me with the full approval and support of obstetricians in the Birmingham area, some of whom are constituents of mine. None of us here is as expert as those men, and they say, from a lifetime of experience, that it is wrong that we in this House should presume to take such a decision when we do not know enough about it.

We have had official inquiries into docks, transport, merchandising and a thousand other problems. We have had Royal Commissions on capital punishment, homosexuality and prostitution. Surely we deserve to be more fully informed on the problem of abortion before we change our laws.

Why is there all this hurry to act in ignorance? If one really believed that the law should be changed and that one possessed irrefutable evidence in support, one should want to place such evidence before an independent tribunal to convince the country of its truth and one's own integrity. The reformers have not asked for such an inquiry. Indeed, since the B.M.A. set up its Committee of Inquiry, they have pressed even more strongly for quick law reform. Are they afraid of the truth? They may be, but the country must have the truth before it is asked to legislate. The matter is not so urgent that it cannot wait for the facts to be gathered and for opinions from responsible people to be canvassed properly.

It is not pleasant or easy for me to speak in this House on something on which I have a perfect right to utter privacy, but I must say that I am in the position, with my family almost grown up, and having a job to do here in this House, that it would be disastrous for me if I were to start having another baby. Yet, in my position here, I beg the House to believe that I speak with absolute sincerity. I cannot, with all the information that is before me, find it in my heart right to support this Bill which regards getting rid of an innocent baby as something that is right.

I had concluded my speech, but I hope the House will allow me to answer that question. I said then, as I say now, and as I said in my speech, that I would support abortion after rape. I said that only a few minutes ago. In my letters to my constituents I have stated precisely the circumstances in which I would support abortion, and I touched on them again today. If the hon. Lady's correspondent has sent her the whole of my letter, she will know that on every occasion I said that I could not support abortion on demand. That is what I said then, and that is what I say now.

  