Would not the hon. Gentleman agree that it would be extremely rash to draw any conclusion from such surveys unless one had a very close definition of what constituted a polled Catholic in these circumstances?

We all agree that this has been a vitally important debate, conducted on a level which is worthy of the highest traditions of the House, and rightly so, because we are dealing with issues of paramount importance both to our morality and to our future as a society. I should like to join in the congratulations which have been expressed to the hon. Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles (Mr. David Steel) on the manner in which he introduced the Bill, which he did with extraordinary moderation and skill, and I should also like to congratulate the hon. and learned Member for Walsall, North (Mr. William Wells), who moved the Amendment, and, in particular, my hon. Friend the Member for Birmingham, Edgbaston (Mrs. Knight), who spoke very movingly. After all, a woman has much more right to speak in this debate than has any other hon. Member. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. Lady the Member for Wolverhampton, North-East (Mrs. Reneé Short) will catch your eye when I have concluded.

At the outset, I want to make my own position plain. I am not a member of a cabal, as the hon. Member for Pontypool (Mr. Abse) seemed to be suggesting. My personal religious commitments are probably known to hon. Members. I do not seek to build my case against the Bill on those today. In our contemporary pluralist society, which is secular in substance although not in form, religion cannot play a determining role. For better or for worse, theology is no longer queen of the sciences not absolute ruler, not even a constitutional sovereign ; but the voice of theology can be raised, although I should be the first to agree that it should not be imposed.

I accept that position fully. There is one point nevertheless which I must stress and that is the position of those in the medical profession who have a conscientious objection to abortion, which was a point raised by the hon. and learned Member for Walsall, North. The Bill does not require in so many words a doctor or a nurse to carry out an abortion. It is permissive, not mandatory. Yet if it is passed it must create a new state of affairs in which abortion, will be much more extensive as a part of medical practice than at present.

I do not want to give way to the hon. Member. There are many hon. Members who wish to speak in the debate.

I should, therefore, like to see a conscience Clause included in the Bill which would specifically safeguard the interests of those doctors and nurses so that under no circumstances would they be compelled to take part in abortions which were against their conscientious convictions. That would be a fair balance for the extension provided by the Bill.

The arguments on the Bill have been put forward with great conviction and great emotion. We should see them in some perspective. First of all, to put it at the highest, abortion is a necessary evil ; that is the most that one can say for it. The mental suffering which may come to a woman after abortion is very considerable. Secondly, we should remember when discussing the question that the problems of sterility are much more intractable and cause much more suffering than the problems of fertility.

The case for the Bill has rested partly on utilitarian consideratians  that there is a high number of illegal abortions and that this Bill would reduce them. It is my view that both these propositions are ill-founded. In the nature of the case there can be no reliable statistics on the number of illegal abortions. The degree of variation is so wide that one could only call it wild.

The hon. Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles quoted figures from 200,000 at one end to 40,000 at the other. That is an immense variation. Lord Silkin quoted a figure of 100,000 illegal abortions a year, which I was very distressed to hear the Home Secretary use in his speech. As far as I know, that is a statistic founded on no evidence whatever ; it is a guess. I was sorry to see the Home Secretary depart from his neutrality on that point. Other evidence put forward by Dr. Goodhart in a learned medical journal puts it at 10,000. My point here is that these statistics are so unreliable that they cannot be used as a basis for a rational judgment.

The second point made in favour of the Bill is that it would reduce the number of illegal abortions. It may, but the experience of other countries, such as Sweden, and certainly Eastern European countries, is quite the opposite. Illegal and legal abortions go up together. The only way that one will get rid of illegal abortions is to get rid of restrictions altogether. That will get rid of illegal abortions ; nothing else will. Presumably that is a view which some supporters at least of the Bill take.

The supporters of the Bill have a theology of their own which has at times been implicit and at times explicit in the course of the debate, namely that every woman has a right to an abortion to get rid of a child that she does not want. That is certainly the view of the Abortion Law Reform Association. I will quote a letter by an official of that association, Mrs. Chataway, to the recently. She concluded her letter by saying: That is very nice if one can arrange it, but to do so one has to choose one's parents extremely carefully. But this is a significant step in the argument because abortion has been changed from a crime, to a right, to a duty. If an unborn child has a right to be born wanted, then if it is not wanted the parents clearly have a duty to dispose of it.

Against that view another quite contrary view has emerged in the debate, that there is not one right involved here, the right of the mother, but that there are two rights. There is the right of the mother, of course, but there is the right of the unborn child. It is the almost universal tradition of the Western world that a child in the womb has rights, both legal and moral.

Surely this is correct. After all, who is more affected by the decision to have an abortion than the unborn child whose life is to be snuffed out? When the decision to abort or not is taken, with all the dramatic implications for life and death, everyone can speak except the child. The mother can give her views, the father can give his and the doctor can speak, but the only person who is silent is the person most radically affected. The child cannot rise up in the womb and say," I want to live". Here, surely, the tradition of the Western world is right that the law should intervene to protect the silent child. Which of us if given the choice at that time would have opted for death rather than life?

It is precisely because the unborn child is so helpless and unable to speak that it has a claim on our protection. It is for this reason that the common law, Statutes and codes of medical ethics from the Hippocratic oath onwards, have extended their protection to the unborn child.

The Bill is fundamentally flawed because it rests upon denial of the sacred character and value of human life. The principle was recently reaffirmed by the House when it voted for the abolition of the death penalty. This principle is not one dependent on the recondite speculations of scholastic theologians as to when the soul does or does not enter the body, because nobody can know that. It rests upon the moral principle, all but universally accepted, that human life has an intrinsic value in itself, and that innocent human life should never be taken.

That is implicit in the common law idea of the It is explicit in the Declarations of Human Rights that have been issued from the American Revolution onwards. The acceptance of this principle has had a profound effect on the character of our society, on it is based not only the concept of liberty, but those of equality and fraternity as well.

Of course, there is scope for argument about when the right to life begins, but it is of profound significance that modern microbiology has confirmed the assertions of theologians that human life is fully present from the moment of conception and there is no qualitative difference between the embryo and the born child. There is only a difference of development. The embryo has a life of its own and has the full potentiality of becoming a human being. Therefore, it cannot be treated as mere animal matter to be excised from the womb and thrown aside and discarded in a dustbin or incinerator.

I should not oppose subsection (1) of Clause 1 of the Bill, because it clarifies the existing law. The Clause is based on the clear principle of the legal doctrine of necessity, that there are circumstances which face one with an agonising choice which must be made. Subsection (2) is very different. It provides for abortion if there is a substantial risk that the child may suffer from physical or mental abnormalities so as to be seriously handicapped. That introduces a quite new principle into the law, namely, that one human being can make a judgment about another as to whether that human being's life is worth living. That is an entirely new principle in the law. In my view, it is dangerous and wrong. The evidence of deformity in any case is far too uncertain to be able to form a basis for a reliable judgment. If it is desirable to blot out deformity it would be much more logical and sensible to let the child be born, to see whether it is deformed when born, and then to destroy it. That was a point made by my hon. Friend the Member for Edgbaston. But we would all recoil, rightly, from such a course. Yet there is no difference in reality between the two situations. The only difference is that the second course strikes the imagination much more forcibly and effectively.

The Amendment pays tribute to the humanitarian motives of the sponsors of the Bill. That is not a piece of cant, as the hon. Member for Pontypool suggested. It is a genuine appreciation of the depth of conviction of those who support the Bill. But we are not concerned so much with the motives of hon. Members. We are concerned with the effects of the legislation which they promote. Considering the effects of the Bill, there is only one word and I choose it very carefully which I would use to characterise some of these proposals, and that is" barbarous" because they attack a principle on which the whole security of society rests, namely, the principle of the sanctity of life.

The attack is not from without the city ; it is from within. Yet never was there a time when it was more important to preserve our basic moral consensus of which this respect for life is a vital part. Never was there a time when it was more important to preserve our faith in the value and uniqueness of our own humanity. As my hon. Friend the Member for Stratford-on-Avon (Mr. Maude) said, we are faced with an advance of technology, which, while seemingly bringing benefits to man, may in the end dehumanise him. In this situation the moral consensus bequeathed to us by previous generations is of vital importance in erecting barriers beyond which technology cannot pass.

It may be that the Bill commands the support of the majority of members of the public. That for me does not decide the issue. I would not submit my views or conscience on an issue of this kind to a public opinion poll any more than I would submit them to a Church or a political party. I view with dismay a society which combines a low level of thinking on matters of principle with a high degree of benevolence and good will. That can be a very lethal combination.

In conclusion, may I say that if the Bill has the support of the majority of hon. Members here, it is right that it should pass and I hope that there will be no attempt to talk it out. Certainly no such attempt will be made by me. Those of us who oppose the Bill will, of course, abide by the decision of the House and we will work constructively to improve the Bill and to neutralise its dangers. But even if the Bill passes the House, a t least we shall have had the satisfaction of having had the oppor- tunity, those of us who have opposed it, of having stated what is still virtually the universal Christian tradition of the vital importance of the sanctity of life, a tradition which in the long run may well prove to have been the true humanitarian position as well.