I have pleasure in supporting the Bill, and I congratulate the hon. Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles (Mr. David Steel) on the way in which he introduced it. I should like the House to take particular notice of what was said by the hon. Member for Falmouth and Cam-borne (Dr. John Dunwoody), because on this matter he has more experience than anybody in the House, and I thought that he put his points extremely fairly and reasonably.

I realise the sincerity with which she spoke, but I regret that my hon. Friend the Member for Birmingham, Edgbaston (Mrs. Knight) made some of the remarks that she did. I think that my hon. Friend rather exaggerated when, with regard to subsection (1, ), she talked about abortion on demand, because it refers specifically to abortion when a mother I thought that the hon. Member for Falmouth and Camborne demonstrated clearly what this meant, and what I felt, about family life in this connection.

I am sorry that my right hon. Friend the Member for Ashford (Mr. Deedes) is not here, but he told us why he had to leave. A well-reasoned document entitled" Abortion. A Conservative view" , has just been published. The group which wrote this document suggests that I am glad that that point has been made. Perhaps that type of wording would have satisfied my right hon. Friend.

I admire the excellent work done by psychiatrists, but if a woman has six or seven children she does not have time to spend two or three hours a day, or even a week, with a psychiatrist going over her problems. She is anxious not to create further problems for herself.

I am glad that the hon. and learned Member for Walsall, North (Mr. William Wells) has returned to the Chamber, because I did not think that he made a very good case for his point of view. We all have the sanctity of life in mind. I agree with my right hon. Friend the Member for Ashford. We do not want to encourage abortion, but we want to take a step forward in helping the woman concerned.

My hon. Friend the Member for Edgbaston was worried about the loss of life, but Lord Brain said: I think that one must take that factor into account when discussing the Bill.

As an unmarried woman, I find it a little difficult to address the House on this subject, but, speaking from my knowledge of social work, I think that most women desire motherhood. It is natural for a woman to want to have a child. When I tried to bring in a Bill to deal with desertion and affiliation orders, I was impressed by the fact that women were often pregnant at the time their husbands deserted them and that the girl in respect of whom there was an affiliation order was, of course, expecting a child. What most of them wanted was financial support. They had no thought of terminating their pregnancies.

This interested me considerably. It is only in extreme cases that a woman wants to terminate her pregnancy. I know a young woman who has had two children by two different men, and she is working very hard to bring them up. I think that it is an exaggeration to say that women desire this operation which, as the hon. Member for Falmouth and Cam-borne said, is not a pleasant one. It is carried out only when it is essential for physical or mental reasons.

When I heard that the Bill was to be introduced, I attended a one-day conference organised by the Family Planning Association. One general practitioner ended his speech with this cry from the heart: I do not think that women are selfish. In general, they are very law-abiding. They rarely seek an abortion for its own sake, but for the sake of the family and the unborn child. I suggest that we know very little about what drives a woman to try to terminate her pregnancy. Until our antique and confusing abortion laws are changed, many women will continue to seek these illegal abortions.

I heard another general practitioner say this about a patient who came to see him: This, he said, was a cry from the womb, a womb invaded, perhaps by accident, perhaps by force, but it arouses equal feelings of distress in the family doctor. His actions are restricted by a law which is permissive, but which, at the same time, is vague.

I have received a letter from St. Paul's Union of Catholic Mothers. I think that they rather misunderstand the purpose of the Bill, because they say: They are not condemned to death at all. Nothing can be done without a mother's complete agreement and permission.

I hope that we shall make the way easier for the general practitioner, because he now has a rather difficult time. He has to consult a gynecologist, and he cannot be certain who will act for him. He alone has a real knowledge of his patient, and if he is a good general practitioner his patient will have discussed the matter with him, and it is extremely unfortunate that on many occasions he may have to" shop around" to find a gynecologist to help him with his problem.

I think that we would all agree that where the physical health of an expectant mother is in danger there is little difficulty in obtaining action. Nevertheless, if we can make a change in the law it can be of great advantage to a woman, because she will know that she can go quite openly to her general practitioner. Dr. Joan Malleson, writing in the said: There is also the question of spontaneous abortions. A great number of abortions are spontaneous, and nobody says that in those circumstances the mothers have killed their children. According to a report of a survey made in Charing Cross Hospital, of 208 cases there were 109 spontaneous abortions, 45 induced abortions and 54 cases where the cause was not known. Many women lose their children through spontaneous abortion, and nobody suggests that life has been taken they get all our sympathy.

Dr. Harry Roberts, who wrote" A symposium on abortion" , strongly urged that some action should be taken. He said that when the operation of abortion is performed by competent surgeons with full legal and social approval there is very little danger. I want to make sure that there is no danger to the women concerned.

My hon. Friend the Member for Edgbaston referred to the question of family planning and contraceptives. She probably knows that the Birmingham Abortion Law Reform Association has made a study of the situation and has discovered how inadequate are many of the medicines and other preparations sold to women as being fully protective. This evidence comes from her own city. In my opinion, abortion should be allowed where the doctor honestly believes that if pregnancy continues there will be a risk of the patient's dying or becoming a physical or mental wreck.

Most of us have received many letters on this subject, and a gynaecologist, Mr. Peter Diggory some hon. Members may have seen the letter he wrote to in support of the Bill and I also have here a copy of a lecture that he gave at the conference to which I have already referred. He said: that is, the number of women who seek illegal abortions   That is what the House should be trying to do. Whether the Bill does or does not do this is something that we can thrash out in Committee. It is extremely difficult to talk about a subject on which people feel so strongly in a debate like this, but in Committee we can discuss the details of the Bill, and how it can work.

Mr. Diggory went on to say that he carried out therapeutic terminations both under the National Health and privately. He said: It is quite wrong for any doctor to put his ethical reasons before the consideration of his patient, but I suppose that this would be the only case in which we would refuse an operation on those grounds.

Mr. Diggory went on to say, of therapeutic abortion, that of about 110 he carried out, 96 were for psychiatric reasons, two were cases of chronic nephritis,' one was the case of a girl barely 15 years of age who had had one kidney removed and had had two major operations on the other. In 11 cases there were indications that there was danger of the birth of an abnormal foetus ; in 10 of these the mother had had rubella in early pregnancy, and in one a woman already had a congenital amaurotic idiocy. It should be pointed out that she was a doctor's wife, and had apparently been refused termination elsewhere.

I hope that we shall give the Bill a Second Reading, so that we can discuss in Committee how the law should be changed, and so that other people who have not had a chance of doing so today can put forward their views. I have some experience in respect of Private Members' Bills. Mine, regrettably, was talked out. I hope that this will not be. I hope, however, that if it is the Government will have the courage as Mr. Butler, as he then was, had in respect of my Bill to take it over.

I agree with the sponsor that it is wrong that these matters of great impor- tance should be left entirely to private Members. So much depends on the vote today. I hope that there will be very strong support for the Bill and that it can go to Committee for detailed discussion. If, however, by any unhappy chance it should fall by the wayside, I hope that the strength of opinion shown in the House will be such that the Government will feel bound to take it over.

I could not agree less with the hon. and learned Member for Walsall, North. I have opposed the Wolfenden Report on every occasion, especially in connection with the , and I shall go on opposing it as long as I can, but I do not think that the hon. and learned Member was showing a very liberal mind by supporting that Report and refusing to support this Bill. He did not advance any real argument against this Bill, nor did my hon. Friend the Member for Edgbaston. Neither hon. Member has shown that there is no need for a change in the law. I therefore repeat my hope that the Bill will receive a Second Reading, and that it will not be too emasculated in Committee so that it means nothing in the end.

Before my right hon. and learned Friend sits down 