My hon. Friend has dwelt on the question of depression. Would it not be fair, since he alone so far has emphasised the seriousness of this and the possible consequences, also to stress that, among the sequelae of abortion, can be very serious, chronic and sometimes permanent effects by way of depression? Would that not be fair, to get a balance?

The Home Secretary has, characteristically, made a courageous speech, and it is one which we would expect of him. However, he commented that he has noticed that among those who are involved with this Second Reading there are considerable differences of opinion and indeed opinions which he may regard as eccentric to the contributors is that I doubt whether anyone can view a Bill of this kind with enthusiasm. Although I do not go as far as the hon. Member for Chelmsford (Mr. St. John-Stevas), who appears to take such a view that he is minded to vote against the Bill, it would be wrong to say that I can view the Bill with any enthusiasm.

Even if we come to the conclusion that it must proceed, in some measure the passing of the Bill is bound to be a proclamation of defeat on behalf of the community. If it were a very widely drawn Bill, it could be a proclamation of bitter defeat. If it were more narrowly drawn, it could be a defeat, just the same. No hon. Member who acknowledges that life is our most precious gift can possibly view with enthusiasm a Bill whose declared object is to thwart the life of the unborn babe.

As there have been so many quotations, perhaps I might bring in a Talmudic one which says that the world survives in the breath of little children, and some parents daily tell themselves just that.

Hon. Members on this side of the House, and many on the other side, too, must believe that, ideally, a society should be such that every child, whether born fatherless, whether born handicapped, whether born in a palace or in a manger, should be received with warmth and be endowed with care. This is our starting point. Let no one suppose that a Bill of this kind can be a triumph for the community. There are societies which are impatient of doctrines which place the same ultimate worth on each personality. These societies are ready to rid themselves of all the weak, whom they regard as encumbrances. The Nazi society, the great life deniers, killed off the aged and the mentally backward. The primitive African tribes, which some of us may have known from our military experience during the war, still commit infanticide against a child lacking a limb, and not long ago the Chinese were leaving the new-born female child to die of exposure and succouring only the male child.

Respect for life is the cornerstone of our society today. Every failure that we make to plan so that every life can live out its full potentiality within its puny transient span is a defeat, just as every hanging of a murderer or traitor is a defeat for the community, and a sign that the community does not know how to gain loyalty and is admitting its failure to deal with its failures.

Other hon. Members have said that they wanted to declare their prejudices or philosophies, and I think that I should make mine. Speaking as a humanist concerned with life, not with after-life, I find myself with a deep sense of unease about the approach to a Bill of this kind. The lack of frankness in the Amendment is not made any the more attractive by this sickly reference to the humanitarianism of its sponsors.

I prefer the more robust attitude which the Royal College has adopted on this question. It said quite bluntly that those without specialised knowledge, and this includes members of the medical profession, are influenced in taking what they regard as a humanitarian attitude to the induction of abortion by a failure to appreciate what is involved. The Royal College of Obstetricians do not regard abortion as a trivial operation free from risks, and they say that there are serious risks. It would be unfortunate if, as a result of this debate, when clearly a more permissive atmosphere is part of the ambience of this Parliament, it were thought that we were treating abortion lightly, that it was a case of something like taking out a tooth. It should be emphasised that it is a serious act, and figures show that the maternal mortality rate of legal abortions in Denmark is three times our own, including the legalised abortions that take place here.

As the right hon. and learned Member for Warwick and Leamington (Sir J. Hobson) said, we must have regard to what the Royal College has said. They say that there are immediate risks of peritonitis and thrombosis. There are sequelae which can lead to a hysterectomy ; there are statistics which show that apart from the possible fatal consequences when abortions are done, not in back streets, but in optimum conditions, serious consequences, which are nonfatal, can follow.

There are dangers of sterility. The College emphasise the personal tragedy of the premarital abortion which eventually means that when a girl marries she is unable to have children. From my experience in a divorce practice, having seen so many well-documented case histories of abortion within the divorce papers, where an abortion taken too trivially and too lightly in the early years of a marriage has led unfortunately to sterility and the subsequent mutual recriminations that almost inevitably follow, I sometimes think that people talk too lightly about what is a serious act.

My hon. Friend the Member for Plymouth, Sutton (Dr. David Owen), who spoke as a medical man and as a member of the Royal Medico-Psychological Association, spoke quite rightly about the psychological consequences to a woman who wants to have an abortion and fails to have one. I pointed out and my hon. Friend acknowledged the truth of what I said that there were also serious consequences when a woman had an abortion.

Statistics have been quoted by the Royal College which conform with my opinion that a high percentage of women may suffer all their lives as a consequence of the guilt which burdens them when they find they have decided to kill their own child. Depression and serious psychiatric disorders can follow. I hope that nobody will allow it to go out from the House that in adopting a Measure of this kind we are taking the question of abortion lightly.

My hon. Friend the Member for Sutton indicated that he thought that the priorities of the Bill were odd. I agree. There is a prissy attitude on the part of the State to planned parenthood something which my hon. Friend the Member for Bebington (Mr. Brooks) hopes to remedy, to some extent, in the Bill which will come before the House later. The prissy attitude that we have adopted means that we are a long way from having within our National Health Service the possibility of everybody having access to the knowledge and guidance necessary for planned parenthood and the stability of family life that goes with it.

 Before we turn to the serious operation of aborton we should consider all the medical opinion, and the question whether there are alternatives. I do not understand why, so far, nobody has referred to the fact that the Royal College, with all its knowledge, has said that it is a far less dangerous operation almost a slight operation for a man to be sterilised. But I have noticed that if one says to a man," Look, if a working class woman has six or seven children and is worn out, and there is every probability that she will have another one, do you agree that she should be sterilised?" he will often agree, but if one puts to him the reverse possibility the sterilisation of the man, which could end the dilemma of the working class family in such circumstances he recoils, because he regards it as an assault upon his own masculinity. There is not the same reaction when one suggests that action should be taken by way of an abortion which many women regard as an assault upon their femininity.

It is unfortunate that the sponsor has not taken account of the advice of the Royal College and incorporated in the Bill an explanation of the law of sterilisation, which requires definition just as much as does the law of abortion.

It would make it clear and would mean that we would provide a solution for working-class women who are often in great difficulty. I am not impressed by the argument that because the rich do something stupid working class people should follow their example. If it is healthier to avoid abortion it must be avoided by rich and poor. Some of my hon. Friends should not think that they are waging the class struggle when they are participating in a discussion of the reform of the abortion laws.

Some of the Clauses in the Bill are naive. I will not refer to the obvious anomaly within the Clause of rape. Lawyers must look with cynicism at a Clause of this kind, when they consider their own experience. After all, I once defended a man accused of raping six prostitutes. There was nothing physical to show at the end. All he had done was call on a prostitute by himself and produce a weapon and insist that, under duress, she should have intercourse with him. Technically, as the right hon. and learned Member for Warwick and Leamington has pointed out, that would be rape.

Easy talk of this kind, suggesting that one gets a certificate as if one were having a few days off work in a serious matter of this kind, shows an extraordinary naivety. More seriously and to the point, there are some aspects in these Clauses, such as that which deals with the position of the schoolgirl mother, which show a lamentable lack of understanding. I am proud to be associated with the National Council for the Unmarried Mother and Her Child. The Council recently held a conference to discuss" Pregnancy in Adolescence" in which a number of important contributions were made.

The man who had perhaps the greatest experience was a psychiatrist who runs a hostel for schoolgirl unmarried mothers, and he pointed out that the one common feature of very young mothers which he had seen was an extreme craving to be loved. He said: What he was saying was that a schoolgirl pregnancy is a sign of unhappiness as well as a cause.

We should use more caution when we think of introducing a Clause which would mean a new burden inflicted on a schoolgirl in the form of an unwanted operation forced on her in the name of progress and freedom. I believe that weight should be given to some of the deeper factors. I do not share the view that by saying this I may be drawing back from supporting a Second Reading of the Bill. It is self-evident that there is a need for a declaratory law to be put unambiguously before the medical profession.

There is a strong case for Clause 1 (1, ), but there is a need for caution and for considerable discussion in Committee. I am not as pessimistic as the right hon. and learned Member. I do not think that if, as I hope, the Bill receives a Second Reading, we will therefore forfeit our right in practice so to mould the Bill that it will more commend itself to us. I have had experience of sponsoring a Private Member's Bill, which had a Second Reading and went right through Committee but was finally sabotaged in its final stage by a cabal.

I would say to that same cabal, if they are operating in the House today, that they will be doing a great disservice to themselves if they seek to adopt the tactics over this Bill which they adopted in the past, if they do not allow this Second Reading because they hold particularly religious views. This debate should be voted upon and I hope that the Bill will be given a Second Reading. I hope that the Bill will be thought upon and worked upon in Committee so that it will come back to the House. Then we will have to apologise for it to ourselves, shall have to say," It may be that we have not as yet sufficient medical or psychiatric knowledge, or social services of quality. It may be that there are still lamentable social conditions which compel us to permit abortion. We apologise and, with dismay and no great enthusiasm, we pass the Bill on to the country."