It gives me great pleasure to speak immediately after the hon. Lady the Member for Plymouth, Devonport (Dame Joan Vickers). She and I shared the same political platform at an inter-Church meeting and declared our intention to support a Measure of abortion law reform should one come before the House. I support the plea for this Measure to be given Government time. Obviously there should be a free vote, but leaving such Bills to the vagaries and difficulties of Private Members' time means that a Government is shirking this responsibility.

No one can speak for a whole profession, least of all the medical profession ; which contains so many different strands of opinion, different thoughts and religious beliefs. I would not wish to do so. I should like, however, to tell the House something of the experience of someone who has had cases referred to him for a psychiatric opinion on abortion. In particular, I should like to draw the attention of the House to Clause (1, ), which is the main strength of the Bill and, naturally, its most contentious portion.

Paragraphs and are clarifying the law as it is already practised. They are not a substantial advance on present practice. Paragraphs and are new and would be very valuable additions for the guidance of practitioners faced with this difficult decision. At times, in the debate, we have tended to become too emotional. This is an extremely difficult issue. People who relate abortion to tonsillectomy are doing their cause a great disservice. This is a very different issue. The whole reproductive cycle of woman is intimately linked with her psyche. We know that a woman is susceptible to depression at times of pregnancy, at times of the menopause and at times of menstruation.

Interfering with a natural course of pregnancy is something which a doctor does only with great care, knowing full well that he is doing something which could have adverse effects. I should like to quote from the views of one organisation which has a unique contribution to make to discussion of this matter the Royal Medico-Psychological Association. I should declare an interest, because I am a member.

This association speaks for the body of psychiatrists in this country and has produced a memorandum on the subject, which is necessary reading for everyone who is interested in the Bill. It is worth quoting at length from their preamble: I would say to my hon. and learned Friend the Member for Walsall, North (Mr. William Wells) that there would be no pressure on junior doctors to undertake an operation to which they felt a religious objection. I have worked as a junior doctor in a hospital and I know that this applies also to nurses, and that if any nurse feels that this is a distasteful opera- tion she is at freedom to leave the operating theatre. Many do, and the medical profession as a whole accepts this.

The profession must also accept that society has the right to make certain demands on it. I was glad that my right hon. Friend the Member for Leeds, West (Mr. C. Pannell) made the cogent point that the medical profession has to serve the community as well. This is why paragraph is so important, because what it is attempting to do although we may change it in Committee there is much of the Bill which I should like to see changed and clarified in Committee is to draw attention to the fact that medicine and the concept of health have been undergoing a dramatic change over the last decade.

Social medicine is at the moment one of the most expanding aspects of medicine. The new concept has emerged of the doctor as the leader of a medical team of social workers phychiatric social workers and welfare officers who consult among themselves, and the social and economic background is a vital part of health. By giving a Second Reading to the Bill, we would underline a change which has already occurred, is continuing and is a progressive and inevitable outcome of modern medicine.

The more we learn about depression, the more we realise how it is influenced by social factors, by appalling housing and overcrowding. We should think of the doctor who is faced with the problem of a woman with seven children who tells him that she shares her bed with her husband and two children, with perhaps two other children living and sleeping in the same room. This sort of thing still occurs in this country, and we must face it.

When we decide whether abortion should be given in contrast to the person with four bedrooms, and a bedroom for each child, the doctor must take this into account 

No, I should like to assure my hon. Friend that I do not think it is the remedy. There are many remedies, but we are faced with the immediate situation as it is.

Such a woman is in total misery, and could be precipitated into a depression deep and lasting. What happens to that woman when she gets depressed? She is incapable of looking after those children, so she retires into a shell of herself and loses all feeling, all her drive and affection. Members of my profession in the House have seen people who are depressed and the total lack of energy and drive.

No. I will not give way again. My hon. Friend may have a chance of speaking.

Depression is often linked with this and is something of which we must take cognisance. There are, of course, differences of opinion in the medical profession. Some doctors feel that the incidence of depression in pregnancy has been exaggerated. Many do not think so and this is the view of the association. This is the more relevant part of the Bill the social and economic factors.

I was going on to make this point and of course I agree with this. I sometimes feel anxiety about talking about the Bill, because the issue is balanced on both sides and is very complex. Because of my own indecision and pointing out these difficulties, I sometimes feel that I might harm the Bill. I do not want to do so, but it is right that these things should be pointed out, which is why many psychiatrists give great thought to the matter before recommending a termination of pregnancy.

This is where it must be said my hon. and learned Friend the Member for Walsall, North was right to do so that this is not a great radical reform which can be equated with all other reforms. It needs very careful thought.

When a doctor makes up his mind on a termination of pregnancy, social and economic factors will inevitably come into his consideration I believe, rightly so. We can no longer treat these as separate issues. Hon. Members have said that they would like to keep to the simple connotation of "health". I suggest that health embraces an increasingly wider field. It is this to which we must carefully give consideration.

In the medical profession there is full recognition of the difficulties created by the present situation. We know that we shall not stop back-street abortion, but there is a feeling in the medical profession that many women are stopped from going to their doctors to discuss their pregnancies because of the present legal situation. If we allow abortion to become lawful under certain conditions, a woman will go to her doctor and discuss with him the problems which arise. If he is a good doctor, he will listen to her patiently and discuss it with her, and he may well be able to offer that support which is necessary for her to continue to full term and successfully to have a child.

I have seen many women who have been given this support, have reached full term, and have been grateful to the doctor for enabling them to do so, but, equally, I am convinced there are people whose pregnancies have rightly been terminated and who would not have been able to accept the burden of another child. I suggest to the House that, given these considerations and the right of doctors to decide the issues, and aware of the social environment into which we are moving and of the feeling in the country, we should regard the Bill as offering a significant advance in our thinking. I am sure that in Committee it can be clarified and the provisions tightened so that there will be less misunderstanding. We need a little less emotion in discussing the issue and a little more realisation of the extreme complexity of the problem. Given that, I believe that we can make a significant advance and that abortion law reform will be understood by everyone.

It is strange that the House is discussing this Bill in this order of priority. It is appalling that the country still does not offer under the National Health Service family planning available for everyone. This is the key to the problem. We cannot discuss abortion without relating it to contraception. Until we break down the barrier of suspicion and ignorance of contraceptive practice, we shall be faced with this increasing problem of abortion. The cure for it is to put the onus on the medical profession to provide advice on contraception.

I should like the next Private Member's Bill to provide that when a doctor makes his six-week post-natal examination the onus is placed on him to introduce the question of family planning. It would be for the woman to decide whether she wished it to be discussed, but this is a positive contribution which must be made by the medical profession in order to spread advice about contraception throughout the country. The necessity to make this very difficult decision about abortion would then be markedly reduced.