I beg to move, That the Bill be now read a Second time.

The issues involved in discussing this Bill today are complex and arouse strong feelings among both the supporters and opponents of the Bill. First, I am grateful that so many Members have decided to remain here on a Friday in order to support this legislation and I also recognise that a number have made equal sacrifices to be present in order to register their strong opposition. I echo what you have already said, Mr. Speaker. I know that many hon. Members wish to speak. I hope that it will be a good debate, and I hope to set a reasonable example by being as brief as possible in introducing a Bill of this complexity.

I am grateful to the opponents of the Bill for the terms in which they have tabled their very reasonable Amendment, recognising as they do the concern that we, the presenters of the Bill, have in bringing it before the House.

At a party meeting the other day an avuncular Liberal Peer said that he was very concerned that Mr. David Steel should be introducing this Bill, not because he disagreed with it he was a wholehearted supporter of it but because Mr. Steel was rather young. I suppose that this is a risk which we must run, unless we are prepared to amend our Standing Orders to exclude Members of Parliament under the age of 30 from the Private Members' Ballot and there may be something to be said for that.

Since I decided to introduce the Bill it has been the subject of much study, and a selection of correspondence and reports which I have received now sits more than a foot high on the bench beside me. The discussions which have taken place among the sponsors and supporters of the Bill have been very extensive.

Before I come to the terms of the Bill, I would point out that this has been a difficult choice for me. It remains my view that it is unfortunate that the practice in the House is for controversial social issues of this kind issues such as the abolition of capital punishment to be left entirely to private Members to bring forward. In my opinion, it would be better if the Government, as part of their social reform, were prepared to bring forward these Measures, although leaving them to be decided entirely on a free vote of Members of the House and of the Government. But this is not so, and I therefore had to consider my choice in the light of the present practice of the House.

Naturally, there are some matters of deep constituency interest which I would have liked to bring forward. It is no secret that I have campaigned in my constituency and in the rest of the country for an extension of the principles contained in the and the use of development authorities for certain areas of the country. Unfortunately, much as I would have liked to introduce something of this kind, it has not been possible to obtain Government support and, quite apart from the practical difficulties involved in any private Member's introducing something for the benefit of his own constituency or his party's propaganda, and also the technical difficulties, there is an issue of principle involved, in that the opportunity to introduce a Private Member's Bill is an almost unique one, which in my opinion should not be used to express a particular point of view for party advantage, perhaps with one eye on the next election. I think that it should be used for something positive whether it be a major or a minor reform which can have a reasonable prospect of arriving on the Statute Book.

I would have voted for a Bill of this kind had someone else brought it forward; I therefore thought it right, given this opportunity, to bring it forward myself.

It is right to start by outlining the present state of the law on abortion. In England and Wales, the law is governed by the Offences against the , which in Section 58 refers to the unlawful administering of any poison or noxious thing or the unlawful use of any instrument with intent to procure a miscarriage. Although the word "unlawful" appears in that Act, nowhere in our Statute Law is there any reference to what would be lawful. Therefore, the law in England and Wales has been built up over a series of cases.

In Scotland, the situation is slightly better ordered as it frequently is. There the procuring of an abortion is a Common Law offence ; there is no Statute Law. But criminal intent must be proved. The Scots law therefore recognises that in certain circumstances it may be necessary, in the interests of the mother and in good faith, to carry out an abortion  something which English law does not specifically recognise.

In England and Wales the law has developed over a series of cases, the most noted of which was the Bourne case, in 1938, when a distinguished gynaecologist was tried, following the termination of a pregnancy that he carried out on a girl who, at the age of 14, had been raped by a soldier. Unfortunately, the case was not judged on the issue whether or not it was right, because of the circumstances of conception, for this operation to have been carried out ; the judgment was based on the effects which the continuation of the pregnancy would have on the patient. The judge, in directing the jury, stated that where a medical practitioner was convinced that the effects of a pregnancy on his patient would be to make the woman a physical or mental wreck, he was justified in carrying out the operation. There has been a series of cases since then which have developed this aspect of the law.

But there is total uncertainty about the exact legal position. It is left far too much to the judgment of individual practitioners whether they are or are not within the law. Moreover a point which is sometimes not noted neither in England and Wales nor in Scotland does the law require any conditions under which this operation may be carried out. This is something that my Bill seeks to introduce.

There are four different methods by which, at present, a woman may obtain an abortion. The first is under the present law, uncertain as it is. Each year, either under the National Health Service or through private practice, a number of women obtain terminations of their pregnancies within the terms of the present law. But even this is not satisfactory, because the likelihood of any woman, in any given situation, being able to obtain a termination of her pregnancy is to a large extent dependent on where she happens to live and upon the practice of hospitals and medical practitioners in her area.

Therefore we find that whereas at one end of the country in Aberdeen, under the wider ambit of Scots law and under the practice of Professor Sir Dugald Baird and his colleagues a fairly large proportion of those desiring medical terminations of their pregnancies are able to achieve this, in some other parts of the country it is almost impossible.

The other three means are all illegal. The second is to obtain an abortion by some self-inflicted means. As far as we are able to discover from the investigations made into this subject, this is far and away the largest section of illegal abortions ; indeed, the number of attempted abortions so far as surveys have been able to discover is far higher than those which are actually attained.

The other two categories comprise abortions carried out by other persons, by a friend or someone anxious to help a neighbour, perhaps or by someone for cash without any particularly persuasive motives. These in many respects are the most dangerous. They have led to the highest number of admissions to hospital following unsatisfactory operations carried out sometimes in the most appalling circumstances.

The fourth category comprises those which are illegal but have a covering of legality, those where the patient, because of her financial circumstances, is able to find or be directed to medical practitioners or psychiatrists who will sign the necessary certificates to cover the existing law on payment of a fee of perhaps 100 or 200 guineas and have the operation carried out in adequate circumstances. This is limited, of course, to those with the means to pay the substantial fees involved. Any law which means one law for the rich and another for the poor is in itself unsatisfactory and should be examined.

Estimates of the number of illegal operations carried out each year vary tremendously. I should not like to assert any particular figure, but a recent survey carried out and published only last week by the National Opinion Polls on behalf of the Abortion Law Reform Association assessed that, at a minimum, about 40,000 abortions took place each year. Some estimates made by people who have studied this subject go as high as 200,000. I would not settle for any definite figure, but it is probably somewhere between 40,000 and 200,000 a year.

I believe that a strong argument for bringing forward the Bill at this time is that there has been a growing tide of public opinion in favour of such a change. I should like to trace this. In 1931, in a case of a woman charged with murder after she had illegally operated on the mother of three children, who had then died, Mr. Justice McCardie said: Following that judgment, there occurred more public agitation.

In 1934, there was the first resolution on the subject, passed by a substantial body of people at the Conference of the Women's Co-operative Guilds. In 1935, the National Council of Women added their support, and in the same year the Abortion Law Reform Association was founded. In passing, I should like to pay tribute to the work of the Association over the last 30 years. In 1935 also more than 30 years ago the subject was raised on the Floor of the House, and in the same year the British Medical Association committee reported that it was in favour of a reform of the law, although the report of that year did not go as far as that report which the Association produced recently.

This led up, just before the war, to the appointment of a Government Interdepartmental Committee, which reported also in favour of reform of the law. No doubt, had it not been for the outbreak of war, the reform which we are seeking might well have been passed by the House of Commons some time ago. The Chairman of the Interdepartmental Committee, the late Lord Birkett, said at the time: He went on, however, to speak of: It is this phrase," in accordance with public opinion" , to which I am referring.

In recent years, the Churches have added their weight to the demands for reform the Church of England Assembly, the Methodist Conference and, this year, the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland. Two National Opinion Polls carried out recently have indicated that three-quarters of the population are in favour of a reform of the law.

Of course, many previous attempts have been made in the House to introduce Bills of this kind. One was sponsored by the present Minister of Health. Among the sponsors of my Bill are two hon. Members who have previously attempted to introduce this reform. Perhaps the greatest jolt to public opinion and one reason that there is more interest and discussion in the Press, in the broadcasting media and among the public, was the introduction of a Bill in another place by the noble Lord Silkin, to whom also I would pay tribute. The effect of the passage of that Bill and its detailed discusion in Committee has been significant in bringing public attention to this matter.

I will turn now to the specific terms of the Bill. The first point to make is that my Bill demands that an operation for the medical termination of pregnancy can be carried out only on the opinion of two registered medical practitioners. In Clause 1, we set out the grounds on which we believe that they should reach that decision. Subsection (1,a) says that a doctor may decide that a termination is justified if the continuance of the pregnancy: This, of course, does no more than make declaratory and clear the existing case law.

Subsection (1,b) goes further and states that it tray be carried out if: I believe this subsection to be justified in the light of more recent medical developments. This is the major difference between this year's B.M.A. Report and their pre-war report.

For example, machines are now being developed in the United States which can determine if the chromosomes of a fœtus are so severely disordered that no human being recognisable as such could be born as a result of the conclusion of the pregnancy. The recent survey to which I referred earlier found that these grounds for the termination of pregnancy received the highest support from public opinion 91 per cent.

Subsection (1, ) refers to the pregnant woman's capacity as a mother being severely overstrained by the care of a child or of another child. We here come to the more controversial matter contained in the Bill. This is known, for the sake of brevity, as the" social" Clause. There is great argument as to whether we ought to try t: write into the Bill a" social" Clause, trying to define the circumstances in which doctors would be justified in carrying out a termination of pregnancy rather than leaving it to the wider interpretation of" risk to physical or mental health". It is important that we should dwell on this matter for a moment.

One could say that it would be better to drop subsection (1, ) altogether and leave the continued operation of the law based solely on the definition of physical or mental health which any doctor may choose to make. But to do this is to leave too great an uncertainty still in the law. It would leave open far too much the interpretation of the law by medical practitioners and would place too great a responsibility on them.

If we in Parliament decide that we want cases of severe social hardship to be considered, we ought to say so. We ought not to demand of the medical profession that they should slip these in under a general Clause relating to physical and mental health.

An alternative way of doing it, although possibly slightly dubious, would be to leave it out and to put in another interpretation of the word" health". An alternative which was suggested was that if one takes the definition of" health" contained in the World Health Organisation's constitution, that is so worded as to include, as it does, social well-being, so that the cases which we have in mind could be covered. But, again, that is not as satisfactory as being absolutely clear what we mean. Paragraph may not be as well worded as many hon. Members would wish. I understand that the Home Secretary has some improvement to suggest in it. I am quite open to all suggestions for improving the wording of the Clause, but I think that we must bear in mind some of the cases which are on the borderline between social, economic cases and purely medical cases.

Paragraph is perhaps the most difficult paragraph in legal terms. It refers to a pregnant woman being a defective or becoming pregnant while under the age of 16 or becoming pregnant as a result of rape. I believe that all these should be put together in one category. I find it difficult to understand the distinction between, for example, the case of a girl under 16 and a case of rape. In fact, in Scots law if one omitted the reference to a girl under 16, she would in any case be covered by the reference to rape, because intercourse with a girl under 16 is rape in Scots law. I believe that both of these should go into one category and that we should look at the category closely.

Most hon. Members would agree that to have a woman continue with a pregnancy which she did not wish to conceive, or in respect of which she was incapable of expressing her wish to conceive, is a practice which we deplore, but the difficulty is to find an acceptable wording which will enable termination to be carried out following sexual offences of this kind but which does not allow an open gate for the pretence of sexual offences. I have tried to cater for this in subsection (4), but it may be that it is a difficulty. I believe that the Committee dealing with the Bill must look very closely at the whole question to see whether the wording of the Bill can be improved.

The rest of the Bill, I believe, is self-explanatory. I think that it is useful to have some form of notification of those cases which are not carried out in National Health Service hospitals ; the latter are, in any case, in hospital records. If one wishes notification it follows that one must have some kind of a penalty included in the Bill.

The difficulty in drafting a Bill of this kind is to decide how and where to draw the line. We want to stamp out the back-street abortions, but it is not the intention of the Promoters of the Bill to leave a wide open door for abortion on request. The difficulty of finding wording in the Bill which will satisfy both those requirements is clear. Experience in Sweden, which is sometimes mentioned by those who oppose the Bill namely, that following reform of the law illegal abortions still take place suggests that in Sweden they have not overcome this difficulty.

I am told that one of the reasons why illegal abortion still takes place in Sweden is their insistence on a panel rather than leaving it to the decision of two medical men. There is a panel including social workers, psychiatrists and medical practitioners to examine and pass each case. They are behind in their work, and many women are reluctant to appear before a panel of this kind. We have to avoid in the Bill wording which is so restrictive as not to have the effect which we are seeking namely, the ending of the back-street abortions.

 I believe that there is one side benefit of the Bill which is sometimes overlooked. If the Bill becomes law it will become possible for a patient to consult her family doctor freely and openly about her pregnancy and about the possible termination of the pregnancy. This is an important new provision. At present the whole question is surrounded by so much whispering and so much doubt about the legality that the effect is that the last person, very often, with whom a woman wishes to discuss it is her family doctor. It may well be that in many cases the effect of introducing the Bill will be that instead of a woman having a back-street abortion, she will discuss the matter with her family doctor, in some way be reassured and feel that she has been offered some guidance, and no abortion will take place at all.

I am reminded of one case, in particular, which shows the need for reform of this kind. It was a case outlined by Alice Jenkins in her book" Law for the Rich." She was approached by her domestic help about a friend who was living with her husband and two very young children in two rooms of a tenement. The only medical advice she was given was that she should have the third child and then learn to practise birth control. She was in very squalid economic conditions and Alice Jenkins was unable to do anything more for her or to give her any further advice. She writes: The effect of bringing the matter into the open and enabling the family doctor to be consulted would, I believe, prevent tragedies of this kind.

It is right that I should say something about my attitude to the passage of the Bill in Committee because I have been asked about this by many hon Members. I do not think that there is any point in accepting Amendments from those who are opposed quite rightly from their point of view in principle to the Bill and wile would remain opposed to it no matter which Amendments I accepted. On the other hand, I want to make it clear that this is a difficult matter and that I do not pretend, in spite of all the consultations which we have had, that the Bill is in any way in a perfect form. I believe that it is quite right that the Committee should be open to invite me to accept Amendments, which I shall certainly be prepared to accept, and in any case it will be for the Committee's free decision to decide how the Bill can and should be improved. It is in that spirit that I look forward to the Committee stage.

In conclusion, I want to deal with two opposite views on the Bill. The first is the attitude of the Roman Catholic Church. I entirely respect the doctrine and beliefs of that Church in this matter, but I would point out that the doctrine of the Church is not necessarily permanent. We are seeing now the possibility of a great change in the attitude of the Catholic Church to the whole question of contraception which would have been unthinkable twenty or thirty years ago. My respect for the Catholic position on this question is occasionally dented by references to euthenasia and other matters which are in no way connected with the Bill.

There is also nothing in the Bill which compels a Catholic patient or a Catholic doctor to be in any way involved in the termination of a pregnancy, and there is also a clear statement in the Bill that nothing in the Bill affects the protection afforded by the law to the viable foetus. I would also point out to the Catholic objectors that public opinion in the Catholic Church is not necessarily behind the doctrine of their own Church and that the surveys carried out show that among Catholics some 57 to 60 per cent., depending on which survey we take, believe that the law should be reformed. Indeed, the most recent survey, to which I have referred throughout my speech, shows that of those women who had had abortions, the percentage who were Catholics was very comparable with the percentage of all those interviewed.

The definition of" Catholic" is, of course, open to the person answering the interview. I would not vouch for any greater accuracy than that. I would not even stand by the complete accuracy of these figures, although I have read the surveys repeatedly and believe them to be as accurate as any can be.

All I am suggesting to those who, like the hon. Member, belong to the Roman Catholic Church is that they do not necessarily speak for the entire membership of that Church, although they speak for its doctrine. I have had a mountain of correspondence on this subject, including several letters from Catholics. I remember one in particular from a Catholic, who wrote to me that she was a devout and practising Catholic and that in the course of her family life she had had five natural miscarriages and simply could not accept the doctrine of her church that on each occasion some form of human soul had been destroyed. I believe that, despite the genuinely-held beliefs of the Catholic Church, Catholics would not wish to impose their own view of this matter on those who do not agree with them. That is one view at one end of the scale.

The other is the view which has been expressed, and which some hon. Members have indicated will be expressed, that the Bill does not go far enough for them and that abortion should be entirely a matter for the woman concerned to decide and that it should be open to all. Again, I respect that view and it has equal force of logic with the Roman Catholic view. It has been tried in some countries. I cannot support that decision, and I do not agree with Mr. Paul Ferris, who has done a great deal of valuable work on this subject, when he says in his book that he hopes that the time will come when the whole question of abortion will be regarded in the same unemotional light as a tonsillectomy. I cannot accept that. This is an entirely different gradation of subject with which we are dealing, but again I respect that point of view. As I said earlier, what we have to do is to try to find a balance of judgment between one extreme and the other in the wording of the Bill.

Finally, those who wish to oppose the Bill have to consider the effect of their opposition. If they were opposing the Bill because they could devise some other means by which abortions would stop tomorrow and by which there would be no unwanted pregnancies and none of the tide of human misery which is developed by our uncertain state of the law, then they would have a strong case. But, as the Home Office statistics show, over the last few years an average of some 25 to 30 women have died as a result of complications following illegal abortions. Many more have been cluttering up hospital beds with the treatment required following these operations. Many lives have been lost through suicide following conditions in which it was impossible to obtain an abortion, or in which abortion was in some way involved.

I will give two instances reported in the Press in May this year. In one a 27-year old house surgeon was sentenced to four years' imprisonment in Liverpool for being an accessory before the fact of the manslaughter of his 20-year old student nurse girl friend. She had had an illegal operation which had been performed by another doctor who later committed suicide. In a case reported in the a 24-year-old woman was found dying in a North London street, after having had an abortion Hard cases, as we are always told, make bad law, but a multiplication of bad cases reveal a very bad state of the law.

The Report of the Social and Moral Welfare Board of the Church of Scotland quotes a German theologian as stating that human life in every form is sacrosanct but that we have to ask ourselves what the quantitative item of sacrosanctity may be attached to each form of life the ovum fertilised, the moving embryo, the born child and the mother. He said: It is in that spirit that I have approached the drafting of the Bill, and I hope that the House will give it a Second Reading.

May I inform the hon. Gentleman 

 that, although I am not yet a father, I hope to be one next month?

I am grateful to the hon. Lady for giving way. I wish to point out that what she is saying is not true. Over the last thirty years, there have been various reports and inquiries, including one Government inquiry, which came to the conclusion that the law should be reformed.

I hope that the hon. Gentleman has not misunderstood I fear that he has what I tried to say about my attitude towards Amendments. The hon. Gentleman has indeed been relating Committee points. If the hon. Gentleman would be willing to give the Bill a Second Reading, these are precisely the type of points which should be examined in Committee and as to which I should be perfectly prepared to accept alterations to the Bill. I did not intend to suggest that, because they happened to be minor points and because they happened to be made by people who object to the Bill, I would not accept them.

No. If I did, I made a mistake, and I was misunderstood. I want to make it quite clear that on the hon. Gentleman's own summary of the rape paragraph I am entirely with him. We just agree or disagree on whether it should be in at Second Reading.

 That the Question be now put.