To make a maiden speech on pregnancy is perhaps a trifle forward, but I have refrained, at times with difficulty, from making earlier speeches in the House the better to ensure my participation in this debate.

Mr. Frank McLeavy was my predecessor as Member for Bradford, East. He was a respected Member of the House for 21 years and served the people of Bradford, East conscientiously and well. In his retirement they and all of us wish him well.

Bradford has always bred a sturdy independence. Its people twice shed their blood in the Parliamentary cause resisting Royalist sieges on their city. Wool packs, Bradford's alternative to sandbags, shielded the cathedral from Royalist cannon. The city is the wool textile centre of the world. Its exports of wool created the words" British made" as a universal symbol of quality. Its name means" at the broad ford" , and it has over the centuries tolerantly absorbed into the broad stream of the city's life many immigrants and many new and excellent ideas. I am sure that Bradford's views on abortion are humane and enlightened.

In a debate of this kind, experience of the problems raised by certain pregnancies is especially valuable. I have represented abortionists, both medical and lay. I have, therefore, met the 30s. abortion with Higginson's syringe and a soapy solution, undertaken in a kitchen by a grey-faced woman on a distracted multi-child mother, often the wife of a drunken husband.

I have also come across the more expensive back-bedroom abortion by the hasty medical man whose patient returns to a distant town, there to lie in terror and blood and without medical attention. We must think, too, of all these women who, by the use of a variety of pills and liquids and instruments, make attempts upon themselves. Had this Bill been law, it would not have helped all such women, but at least it would have succoured those who came within its very limited categories.

I ask for compassion from the opponents of the Bill. I ask them what course they would urge upon their daughter, pregnant under the age of 16, or by brutal rape, or by a husband who had fecklessly hounded her from pregnancy to pregnancy. Clause 1 (1, ) is particularly welcome. It permits the termination of pregnancy when there is substantial risk of a child emerging with serious physical and mental abnormalities. That proposal is endorsed by the Gerrard Committee of the British Medical Association, by the Abortion Law Reform Association and in a booklet recently published by the Conservative Political Centre.

It is a disgraceful law which forbids the interruption of a pregnancy resulting from incest, yet a child of incest may be seriously abnormal, while the difficulties in its social environment defy exaggeration.

It is also unlawful to terminate where the mother has suffered rubella German measles  in early pregnancy, yet the deformity rate from such pregnancies is said to be 30 per cent. That statistic conceals dire disabilities. Some years ago, a general practitioner told me in distress how two gynaecologists in his West Riding town had refused to terminate his patient's rubella pregnancy. The law was upheld. The child had just been born, and it was deaf and blind. The mother already had children and she could not cope with this one. It lives out its life in an institution, bereft of sight and sound and of love. I will never know the simplest joys which are taken for granted by the children of the opponents of the Bill.

Nor must we forget the bitter anguish of the mother of the child. That doctor spoke to me because he knew of my wife's rubella pregnancy. In our case, despite the family doctor's recommendation, the gynaecologist refused to terminate. We came to London and diverse, contradictory and evasive reasons for refusal were offered by medical men. Our quest was in the end successful, and we have no regrets.

But what kind of a law is it that seeks to force the production of blind and twisted babies and drives members of a high and proud profession in fear to shifts and evasions? The Bill is purely permissive. It requires no one to act in a way that his or her conscience forbids, yet for those embraced by its provisions this is a wholesome, glorious and compassionate Measure.

Mr. Speaker, so that, in accordance with the traditions of this House, my speech may be uncontroversial, may I, with the licence allowed to maiden speakers, ask those opposing the Bill to reconsider their position?

  