The right hon. and learned Member for Warwick and Leamington (Sir J. Hobson) said in the earlier part of his speech that this was a subject which arouses considerable emotions. Indeed it does more, it is at once an extremely complicated and emotive subject. Bearing in mind both considerations, we have had a remarkably good-tempered debate throughout the hours which have gone by so far.

I congratulate the hon. Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles (Mr. David Steel) on the force and clarity with which he explained the provisions of the Bill to the House. We can also, whatever our views about the Bill, pay tribute to his sincerity and courage as well as his luck in the Ballot which made it possible for him to introduce this Bill.

The House will not be surprised when I say that the Government's collective attitude to the Bill is one of neutrality. Abortion is a controversial subject on which wildly differing views are held both in this House and in the country. These two facts in themselves would not, of course, preclude Government legislation on a subject. If they did, the House would be very much less troubled by legislation than it is at present. But this diversity of opinion cuts fairly sharply across party lines. It cuts in some surprising ways.

Some opponents of the Bill include those who most vigorously support and, indeed, occasionally complain about me not affording Government time for  other Measures for liberalising social reform. I notice that the hon. Member for Chelmsford (Mr. St. John-Stevas) is among those who signed the Amendment calling upon the House to decline to give a Second Reading to the Bill at this time.

It is thoroughly proper that legislation on abortion should be dealt with by a Private Member's Bill, with the Whips off and with all hon. Members entirely free to vote according to their personal convictions. That free vote will, of course, apply just as much to the individual members of the Government as it does to anybody else. But while the Government's collective attitude must remain one of neutrality, we should be glad to give drafting assistance should the House decide to give the Bill a Second Reading and should such assistance be necessary or desirable either before the Committee stage or between the Committee and the Report stages.

The fact that the Government's collective attitude is one of neutrality, as the right hon. and learned Member foreshadowed does not and, I think, should not preclude me from expressing my own views on this issue. This I shall now do, asking the House to recognise that I am speaking for myself, as I am entitled to do, as is any other hon. Member, and on my own responsibility. I certainly am convinced 

I am myself convinced that the existing law on abortion is uncertain and also, and perhaps more importantly, harsh and archaic and that it is in urgent need of reform. I certainly shall have no hesitation in voting for the Second Reading of the Bill.

I take this view because I believe that we have here a major social problem. How can anyone believe otherwise when perhaps as many as 100,000 illegal operations a year take place, that the present law has shown itself quite unable to deal with the problem? I believe this, too, because of the danger which exists at present to those who are forced to resort to back-street abortionists and to the misery which is caused to some of those who fail to get an abortion. I believe it also because we all know, as was said by the hon. Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles, in his opening speech, that the law is consistently flouted by those who have the means to do so. It is, therefore, very much a question of one law for the rich and one law for the poor.

I believe it also because it causes many otherwise thoroughly law-abiding citizens to act on the fringe, or perhaps on the wrong side, of the law. As the Minister responsible for law enforcement, I believe that to be a thoroughly bad thing. In addition, there is mounting evidence that public opinion outside is now strongly in favour of a change. I think that there is fairly general agreement I must not put it higher than this on Clause 1(1, ) of the Bill, which allows abortion, subject, of course, to safeguards, where Legislation on these lines would at least give statutory effect to the present case law. How much more it would do would need to be worked out in practice.

When Lord Silkin's Bill was debated in another place there was near-unanimity on this provision at least. The more difficult questions are whether we should go further and legalise abortion in the circumstances set out in paragraphs and of Clause 1. I would not try to pretend that those provisions do not raise problems both of practice and of principle. It can be argued that the only satisfactory reform of the law, once it is accepted that it would be wrong simply to place the present case law on a statutory basis, would be to permit any doctor to terminate a pregnancy at his discretion  provided, of course, that this coincided with the wishes of the pregnant woman herself.

There are certainly logical attractions in this course which would go much further than putting the back-street abortionist out of business, but I recognise as I think we all must that many even among those who support major social reform in this field feel that this would be going too far and that we must try to find a defensible half-way house. The Bill, I think, attempts a compromise which in spite of some practical and legal difficulties, might I hope be broadly acceptable to a majority of the House.

I should like to say something about the main provisions of the Bill. In doing this, I shall, for the reasons I have explained, have to point to some of the difficulties of interpretation to which they may give rise and to some of the difficulties which I believe can be dealt with in Committee. I deal, first, with the provision in Clause 1 (1, ) that a pregnancy may be terminated where None of us is likely to forget the thalidomide tragedies of four years ago. Many will have personal experience of the suffering caused to both children and parents by such disasters as there may be for women contracting German measles in the early stages of pregnancy. My own conviction is that the circumstances envisaged in this paragraph and the decision whether to terminate a pregnancy should be left to the wishes of the mother and the judgment of her doctors.

In saying this, I take into full account the speech of my hon. Friend the Member for Kingston upon Hull, North (Mr. McNamara) which, I thought, was an attempt to make all the points extremely fairly and very carefully indeed. When he said," Who are we in this House tto decide?" I paused and thought, but we are not deciding ; we are only making it possible for others to decide. When he went on to say," Who is the mother to decide?" I was not sure that I did not begin to part from him, for I think that the mother has a good deal to do with the decision.

Certainly, and obviously, the father must have a most important part in the family unit, but I doubt myself whether, in practice, there are many examples of women securing abortions against the wishes of the fathers. I think that it is a point fully to be taken into account.

As case law now stands, a doctor has, of course, no choice, and should have no choice, but to refuse abortion except where the likelihood of the child being handicapped puts the mental health of the mother at such serious risk as to move her into the position envisaged in paragraph (a). I do not think that that is sufficient to meet the point which we have in mind here. On the other hand, there are others who say that our paramount concern must be for the sanctity of human life and that this life is equally to be protected before or after birth.

Convictions on this problem are held at such a profound level and raise such deep questions of our whole philosophical attitude to life and death that I am doubtful how far it would be useful for me or any other hon. Member to attempt a rational analysis of the merits of the respective positions, or to seek to persuade those who hold the view that every unborn child is a potential human being entitled to life, and that it is always wrong to destroy the foetus. I can only state my own belief that to take the risk of condemning a potential human being to a life likely to be dominated by suffering and hopeless inadequacy is to assume a responsibility at least as profound as to destroy a foetus which may, in the words of the Amendment, be" potentially healthy". We must surely have regard to the likely effect of such a half life upon the mother and the other members of the family concerned as well.

Paragraph (c), the" social clause" , as I think the hon. Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles described it, is not without its difficulties. Nevertheless, it is, I think, of some importance, because without it many women who are far from anxious to escape the responsibilities of motherhood, but rather wish to discharge their existing ones more effectively, would be denied relief.

 Sir H. Legge-Bourke: Would the right hon. Gentleman consider that, perhaps, in order to determine whether a woman's capacity as a mother would be affected by pregnancy and birth, in addition to the medical advice referred to at the beginning of Clause 1 some other advice should be brought in? As I understand it, the whole Clause depends upon the opinion of two doctors, a decision of two doctors. Is there a case, perhaps, for bringing in someone else?

The hon. Gentleman will agree t hat we have been discussing exactly how far it would be appropriate to raise Committee points on Second Reading, and, clearly, one cannot dissociate one set of points from another. I think that that is pre-eminently a Committee point. The position I am stating from my own personal point of view here is that I see the principle of Clause 1(1, ) as an attempt to deal with a real issue, and that it would be a pity if this issue could not be considered. I am not saying there is a totally satisfactory means of dealing with it in the paragraph as at present drafted, but I do not think that the sponsors of the Bill, though I cannot speak for them, would not be willing to listen to advice on that point, as to any advice which came from the Government Front Bench during Committee.

Clause 1(1, ) differs from Lord Silkin's Bill in that as well as covering the case of a woman who is defective or who becomes pregnant under 16 it adds rape as a ground for abortion. I would imagine that most hon. Members who are not opposed to the principle of the Bill would regard rape as a reasonable ground for abortion, though perhaps not in the form in which this is put in the paragraph. The fundamental problem here really is that if I may so express it the processes of human gestation are much quicker than those of the British legal system. It is very difficult to get a conviction or decision on the indictable offence of rape until the pregnancy has become too far advanced, as most of us would think, for abortion to be a satisfactory solution.

The sub-paragraph seeks to enable the doctor to make a judgment not about the guilt of the assailant, but about whether the woman is entitled to relief, provided that the complaint is made immediately and, as it would have to be in practice, well before pregnancy is established. That might preclude some bogus complaints, but it is still open to considerable practical objection. It may be that in Committee these practical difficulties can be overcome, or it may be that in most genuine cases of rape there will be other grounds already covered in the Bill for terminating the pregnancy.

Even speaking in a personal capacity, I have not attempted to conceal some of the real difficulties from the House. I must add that there are some others relating to the qualifications of the doctors who will be allowed to perform the operations and the places where those operations may take place which fall within the province of my right hon. Friend the Minister of Health. But anyone who knows the record of my right hon. Friend on the subject will not doubt his desire to find a way through them. I think that the House as a whole, if its desire is to proceed on this subject, should also be able to find a way through the difficulties.

The hon. Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles said that he would be open to amendments at the Committee stage. I think that he was wise to say that, because the view cannot be taken that the Bill is perfect as drafted. I have seen no abortion Bill yet which is. The hon. Gentleman also said that he would resist Amendments which struck at the root of the Bill, and he was wise to say that.

I would add a further word. I do not think that it would be any use the House pretending that it wanted to reform the law of abortion if, at the same time, it was to be blind to the practical consequences of any real reform. Few things could be worse than to go through the pretence of a reforming Measure and end up with a statutory position which was just as or even more restrictive than the present practice. I do not think that that is what the House wants or what the country wants.

In my view, opinion is ready for an important far-reaching change, but it is essentially a matter upon which it is for the House to decide. I do not think that it will get a better opportunity than it has today, and I hope that it will not dodge the issue.